The teaching of the Buddha is essentially a path leading to the cessation of suffering. Central to this path is the practice of meditation. Meditation may be considered the heart of applied Buddhism, to which all the preliminary stages of the path lead and out of which the higher stages flow. One of the most important aspects of Buddhist meditation is a set of attainments called, in Pāli, the jhānas. The jhānas are encountered repeatedly in the scriptural texts of early Buddhism. They were instrumental in the Buddha’s own achievement of enlightenment and recurrently enter into the course of training he formulated for his disciples – in the stage of the path preparatory to the higher insights, in immediate association with the liberating wisdom, and again in the end as a spiritual endowment of the fully liberated man.

It is the purpose of the present work to examine the jhānas in order to determine their role in the Buddhist spiritual discipline. The perspective from which they are viewed is that of Theravāda Buddhism, the Buddhist school to which the author belongs as a fully ordained monk. Theravāda Buddhism is probably the oldest continuous Buddhist tradition, maintaining the most accurate record of what the Buddha himself actually taught. Theravāda Buddhist meditation, inclusive of the jhānas, has been reliably treated by several contemporary writers of scholarly stature. The present work, however, approaches the jhānas from a different angle. Whereas most scholars deal principally with the topics of meditation and only incidentally with the jhānas themselves, in our dissertation we focus primarily upon the jhānas as they are in their own nature, treating the topics of meditation only in a summary way. Our approach is psychological and analytical, our intent to look into the inner constitution of the jhānas, lay bare their inner dynamics, and see how they contribute to the purification and liberation of mind which is the goal of the Buddhist discipline.

Our work draws principally upon the scriptures and exegetical literature of Theravāda Buddhism. These sources, composed almost entirely in Pāli, fall into three primary layers of differing degrees of authoritative weight. The first and most authoritative is the Pāli Canon. This is the Tipiṭaka – the three “baskets” or collections of scripture: the Vinayapi:aka, the collection of monastic discipline; the Suttapi:aka, the collection of the Buddha’s discourses; and the Abhidhammapi:aka, the collection of psychophilosophical treatises. The texts in these collections belong to different chronological strata, but a good portion, particularly of the Vinaya and suttas, can be reasonably ascribed to the Buddha himself.

The Suttapitaka was the most useful of the three for our purposes. This collection is divided into five sections: the Dīgha Nikāya (long discourses), the Majjhima Nikāya (middle length discourses), the Saṃyutta Nikāya (topically related discourses), the Aṅguttara Nikāya (numerically arranged discourses), and the Khuddaka Nikāya (miscellaneous discourses). We have relied most heavily on the first four and parts of the fifth as being the most ancient parts of the Pāli Canon.

The Abhidhammapi:aka gives the appearance of being a somewhat later scholastic attempt at systematization, but its teachings are fully consistent with the suttas and help shed light on many points requiring precise analysis and fine definition. We have found particularly helpful the first two books of the Abhidhamma, the Dhammasaṅgaṇi and the Vibhaṅga, which in conjunction with their commentaries clarify a number of knotty points concerning the jhānas. The difference between the suttas and the Abhidhamma is that between a practical pedagogical approach and a philosophically rigorous one. But the two standpoints are found to harmonize and to repeatedly illuminate each other.

The second layer of Pāli literature is the commentaries (aṭṭhakathā). The commentaries were composed for the purpose of elucidating the words of the Tipiṭaka and for drawing out their implications. Their origins go back to very ancient times but they were edited and cast into final standardized versions in the 5th century A.C. by the great Buddhist commentator Bhadantācariya Buddhaghosa, who came from India to Sri Lanka expressly for that purpose. Fundamental to the entire commentarial collection is Bhadantācariya Buddhaghosa’s own original work, the Visuddhimagga (Path of Purification), a massive masterpiece which orders the complex field of Buddhist meditation into an organic comprehensive whole.

The third class of Pāli texts we drew upon is the)īkās. The)īkās are subcommentaries, composed with three principal purposes in view: to elucidate difficult points in the commentaries, to explore important side issues, and to systematize still further the material of the Tipiṭaka. The most useful of these has been the great)īkā to the Visuddhimagga, the Mahā(īkā called Paramatthamañjūsā, composed by Ācariya Dhammapāla who lived in South India in the 6th century A.C. This same teacher is also the author of the)īkās to the Dīgha Nikāya, the Majjhima Nikāya, and the Saṃyutta Nikāya.

For passages from the Suttapi:aka we have principally relied upon the editions of the Pali Text Society. For the commentaries and subcommentaries we have used the editions of the Burmese Buddha Sāsana Samiti, which started its work in connection with the Sixth Buddhist Council held in Burma in 1956. Sinhalese and Devanāgari editions were also consulted when available. Our secondary sources were English and Sinhalese treatises relating to the subject. For the sake of easy cross-reference we refer to commentaries and subcommentaries by their full scriptural titles rather than by their individual names; e.g. we refer to the commentary to the Majjhima Nikāya as Majjhima Nikāya Aṭṭhakathā rather than as Papañcasūdani, to the)īkā to the Visuddhimagga as Visuddhimagga Mahā(īkā rather than as Paramatthamañjūsā, etc. Both names for commentarial works can be found in the list of abbreviations of works used.

Some words are called for concerning the translation of material from the original Pāli sources. Whenever a Pāli text was available in English we have consulted the translation, but in a large number of cases we have found the English renderings unsatisfactory, due either to inaccurate translation or to the use of archaic language. Therefore we have often preferred to give our own translations indicated by the phrase “writer’s translation” (Wr. tr.). Fortunately this procedure was not necessary in the case of the Visuddhimagga, which has been excellently translated by the Venerable Bhikkhu Ñānamoli under the title

The Path of Purification. In some instances, where we present a passage translated by another writer using different renderings for technical terms than those we prefer, we give either our own preference or the Pāli terms in brackets following the other’s rendering; but where the context makes it clear what term is intended we leave the passage as it stands. In all cases of doctrinally important passages translated from the Pāli, by ourselves or others, we give the Pāli original below in the footnotes. For the convenience of the reader a Pāli-English Glossary is provided in the back giving our usual preferred renderings of technical terms connected with Buddhist meditation appearing in the text.

Footnote and bibliographical references to books published in Sri Lanka use “Ceylon” or “Sri Lanka,” as indicated on the title page; the latter is used when no country is mentioned. The systems of transliteration used in citations of Pāli texts in the Sinhalese and Burmese scripts are based upon those used by the Pali Text Society.

Our sincere thanks are due to Professor David F. T. Rodier, Director of the Dissertation, Department of Philosophy and Religion, The American University, and to the other readers, Professor Charles S. J. White of The American University and Professor Cornelia Dimmitt of Georgetown University, for reading the dissertation and for making valuable suggestions. We are also sincerely grateful to the Venerable Dr. Bhikkhu Bodhi who made many very valuable suggestions and helped polish the style and structure of the work. Last but not least we must sincerely thank Dr. Hazel Marie Griffin for her kind hospitality and valuable suggestions in arranging the footnotes and bibliography.
