The jhānas do not arise out of a void but in dependence on the right conditions. They are states of mind which can come to growth only when provided with the nutriments conducive to their development. Therefore, prior to beginning meditation, the aspirant to the jhānas must prepare a groundwork for his practice by fulfilling certain preliminary requirements. He first has to purify his moral virtue, since virtue forms the irreplaceable support for concentration. Then he must sever the outer impediments to practice and place himself under a qualified teacher. The teacher will assign him a suitable subject for developing jhāna and explain to him the methods of contemplation. After learning the methods the disciple must then seek out a congenial dwelling and diligently strive for success. In this chapter we will examine in order each of the preliminary steps which have to be fulfilled before commencing to develop jhāna.

## The Moral Foundation for Jhāna

A disciple aspiring to the jhānas first has to lay a solid foundation of moral discipline. As the Buddha says;

If a monk should wish ‘May I be one who obtains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas pertaining to the higher consciousness, dwellings in happiness here and now’ – he should fulfill the observance of moral[^p25-1] discipline. (Wr. tr.).

And again:

For one who is morally corrupt, lacking moral discipline, right concentration is deprived of its supporting condition... But for one who is morally virtuous, endowed with moral discipline, right concentration possesses its supporting[^p25-2] condition. (Wr. tr.).

From these two statements we can see that any effort to develop jhāna in the absence of moral purity is doomed to failure, while when moral discipline is fulfilled the condition is laid for the practice to bear successful fruit.

Moral purity is indispensable to meditative progress for several deeply psychological reasons. Firstly, moral purity is needed in order to safeguard against the danger of remorse (vippa(isāra). Remorse is the nagging sense of guilt that crops up when the basic principles of morality are ignored or deliberately violated. When it arises it brings restlessness, anxiety, and self-reproach, which threaten to disrupt inner calm. Scrupulous conformity to virtuous rules of conduct protects the meditator from this obstacle to his practice. Therefore the Buddha states that wholesome moral principles (kusalāni sīlāni) have non-remorse as their benefit and reward, non-remorse has joy and rapture as its benefit and reward, and joy and rapture lead to a succession of purifying states[^p26-1] culminating in concentration.

A second reason necessitating a moral foundation for meditation follows from an understanding of the purpose of concentration. Concentration, in the Buddhist discipline, aims at providing a base for wisdom by cleansing the mind of the dispersive, distracting influence of the defilements. In order for the concentration exercises to effectively combat the defilements, the coarser expressions of the latter through the instruments of bodily and verbal action have to first be checked. Moral transgressions being invariably motivated by defilements – by greed, hatred, and delusion – when a person acts in violation of the precepts of morality he excites and reinforces the very same mental factors his practice of meditation is intended to eliminate. This involves him in a crossfire of incompatible aims which will render his attempts at mental purification ineffective. The only way he can avoid frustrating his endeavor to purify the mind of its subtler defilements is to prevent the unwholesome inner impulses from breaking out in the coarser form of unwholesome bodily and verbal deeds. Only when he establishes control over the outer expression of the defilements can he turn to deal with them inwardly as mental obsessions that appear in the process of meditation. But the relation of morality to concentration is not one-sided, for as meditation progresses it brings about in turn a greater purification of morality. As the meditator’s mindfulness gains in sharpness and duration it brings to light more clearly the hidden springs of his behavior. This enables him to refrain from subtler types of bodily and verbal transgression and to aspire for more purified modes of conduct.

The practice of moral discipline consists, negatively, in abstinence from immoral actions of body and speech and, positively, in the observance of ethical principles of promoting peace within oneself and harmony in one’s relations with others. The basic code of moral discipline taught by the Buddha for the guidance of his lay followers is the five precepts (pañcasīla): abstinence from taking life, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, and from intoxicating drugs and drinks. These principles are binding as minimal ethical obligations for all practitioners of the Buddhist path, and within their bounds considerable progress in meditation can be made. However, those aspiring to reach the higher levels of the jhānas, and to pursue the path further to the stages of liberation, are encouraged to take up the more complete moral discipline pertaining to the life of renunciation.

Pāli Buddhism is unambiguous in its emphasis on the limitations of household life for following the path in its fullness and perfection. Householders can achieve proficiency in serenity and insight, and even reach the supramundane path and fruits. But by way of providing the conditions for leading the holy life the inadequacy of household existence as compared to the life of renunciation is clearly recognized.

Time and again the texts tell us of some householder or householder’s son who, after gaining faith in the Buddha, begins to reflect:

The household life is confining, a path for the dust of passion. The going forth into homelessness is like open space. It is not easy for one living at home to[^p27-1] lead the fully complete, fully purified holy life, bright as a conch shell. (Wr. tr.).

Then, following such reflections through, he takes up the course to which they point:

Sometime later, having abandoned his stock of possessions, great or small, having left his circle of relations, great or small, he cuts off his hair and beard,[^p27-2] puts on the yellow robes, and goes forth from home into the homeless life. (Wr. tr.).

For those inclined to the homeless life of renunciation, Buddhism offers a supporting communal structure in the form of the Bhikkhu-sangha, the order of monks. After leaving the household life, therefore, the aspiring meditator, if he is free from impediments, will generally seek admission into the order, taking first the lower ordination of “going forth” (pabbajjā) which makes him a sāma5era or novice, then the higher ordination (upasampadā) which makes him a bhikkhu, a fully ordained monk. The monastic life, with its emphasis on purity, simplicity, and seclusion, was especially designed by the Buddha to establish the optimal outward conditions for inner progress in the practice of his teaching. The foundation for this practice is the training in the higher moral discipline. The moral training for bhikkhus has been shaped into a scheme called the fourfold purification of morality (catupārisuddhisīla), made up of four components:

1. the moral discipline of restraint according to the Pātimokkha;

2. the moral discipline of sense restraint;

3. the moral discipline of purity of livelihood; and

3 4. the moral discipline concerning the use of the requisites. These provide a neat compendium of monastic ethics and a base for meditation.

1. The moral discipline of restraint according to the Pātimokkha (pātimokkhasa.varasīla) consists in scrupulous observance of the rules of the Pātimokkha, the code of training precepts promulgated by the Buddha to regulate the conduct of the bhikkhus. The Buddha describes this aspect of moral discipline thus:

Here a bhikkhu dwells restrained with the Pātimokkha restraint, possessed of the [proper] conduct and resort, and seeing fear in the slightest fault, he trains[^p28-1] himself by undertaking the precepts of training.

The Pātimokkha contains 227 rules incumbent upon all who receive full ordination into the Order. The rules provide the backbone of discipline for the monks. Careful adherence to them serves as the foundation of purified conduct needed to ensure success[^p28-2] in contemplation.

2. The moral discipline of sense restraint (indriyasa.varasīla) means exercising restraint over the sense faculties in their reactions to their objective fields. The canonical text reads:

On seeing a visible object with the eye, he apprehends neither the signs nor the particulars through which if he left the eye faculty unguarded, evil and unprofitable states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he enters upon the way of its restraint, he guards the eye faculty, undertakes the restraint of[^p28-3] the eye faculty.

The same is repeated for the remaining sense faculties and their objects. The purpose of this training is to prevent sense experience from occasioning the rise of the defilements. Because the untrained mind apprehends sense objects through the “signs” or false notions that they are intrinsically attractive and repulsive, agreeable sights, sounds, odors, tastes, touches, and ideas tend to arouse craving and attachment, disagreeable ones to arouse aversion and grief. To conquer this dualistic pattern of emotional involvement, so detrimental to the nascent pool of calm forming within his mind, it is necessary for the aspiring meditator to guard his senses carefully in their encounter with objects. By means of vigilant mindfulness he has to ward off the spontaneous impulses to cling to the pleasant and reject the unpleasant, replacing them with a detached equanimity which can look upon all sense objects equally.

3. The moral discipline of purified livelihood (ājīvapārisuddhi sīla) requires that the meditator avoid a wrong means of livelihood. For a bhikkhu this stricture has an even more exacting application than the right livelihood binding on the laity. A bhikkhu intent on purified livelihood has to obtain his basic requisites – robes, food, lodgings, and medicines – only in ways consistent with the principles of the monastic life. He can obtain them either as alms offerings freely given by the laity or by making requests on

invitation from faithful supporters. It is strictly forbidden for a bhikkhu to put forth false claims to spiritual achievement as a way of bolstering his prestige in the eyes of the laity. He must also avoid resorting to such methods as scheming, persuasion, hinting, belittling, and so forth as ways of gaining his means of subsistence.

4. The moral discipline concerning the use of the requisites (paccayasannissitasīla) follows naturally upon purified livelihood. After obtaining his requisites by righteous means, the bhikkhu is enjoined to use them mindfully, cognizant of the real purpose they serve in the framework of the holy life. To help him maintain this understanding, certain formulas appropriate to each of the four supports – robes, alms-food, lodgings, and medicine – are set down in the texts as subjects for reflection. The standard formulas for these reflections are as follows:

Reflecting wisely, he uses the robe only for protection from cold, for protection from heat, for protection from contact with gadflies, flies, wind, burning and creeping things, and only for the purpose of concealing the private parts. Reflecting wisely, he uses alms food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for smartening nor for embellishment, but only for the endurance and continuance of this body, for the ending of discomfort, and for assisting the life of purity: ‘Thus I shall put a stop to old feelings and shall not arouse new feelings, and I shall be healthy and blameless and live in comfort.’ Reflecting wisely, he uses the resting place only for the purpose of protection from cold, for protection from heat, for protection from contact with gadflies, flies, wind, burning and creeping things, and only for the purpose of warding off the perils of climate and enjoying retreat. Reflecting wisely, he uses the requisite of medicine as cure for the sick only for protection from arisen[^p29-1] hurtful feelings and for complete immunity from affliction.

By using the requisites after making these reflections, the meditator can avoid the lure of craving for comfort and enjoyment. Recognizing the material supports of life to be subordinate in value to a spiritual goal, he is able to develop the virtues of contentment, frugality, and simplicity with regard to his physical requirements.

## Cutting off Impediments

After establishing a basis of purified morality, the aspirant is advised to sever any outer impediments (palibodha) he may have that can hinder his efforts to lead a contemplative life. The Visuddhimagga enumerates these impediments as ten: a dwelling, family, gain,[^p30-1] a class, building, travel, kin, affliction, books, and supernormal powers.

1. A dwelling can be a single room, a hut, or a whole monastery. It becomes an impediment for those who allow their mind to become excessively pre-occupied with work and business connected with the dwelling, or with the belongings they have stored there. Meditation requires the abandonment of concern with the comforts and conveniences of residential life. Thus a meditator who finds his progress impeded by attachment to his dwelling is urged to relinquish it, and to seek a simple, secluded place of shelter where he can pursue his practice.

2. A family means either relatives or supporters. A disciple who lives in close association with lay devotees develops emotional bonds which hinder his progress. He is therefore advised to develop detachment towards them or to shift to a location where intimate involvements are unlikely to arise.

3. Gains are the four requisites. A bhikkhu who achieves fame and distinction may be frequently sought after by lay people to receive offerings of the requisites. To thank them he must recite blessings and preach the doctrine, thus finding no chance to practice meditation. In such a case he should cut off this impediment by leaving his group and wandering to a place where he is unknown.

4. A class is a group of students. A bhikkhu constantly engaged in instructing students has no time to undertake the work of contemplation. If he is intent on full time meditation he should turn his students over to another teacher and go off by himself.

5. Building means new building work. This is always an impediment, since it demands time and mental consideration. To sever this impediment the building work should be completed as soon as possible or handed over to the community of monks.

6. Travel is going on journeys. This should be relinquished in favor of a stable residence conducive to meditation.

7. Kin means specifically close fellows in the Order, such as teachers and pupils, and close relations such as mother and father, who are afflicted with illness. They should be nursed back to health as quickly as possible, or their care turned over to responsible persons.

8. Affliction is any kind of illness, which should be dealt with by taking the appropriate medicines or, if these fail, by persisting in the practice despite the illness.

9. Books means the study of scriptures. This is an impediment for those who find the intellectual work of study obstructive to their meditation. It should be severed by leaving off study and recitation during the period of intensified practice.

10. Supernormal powers are an impediment to insight, not concentration, since they are the products of concentration. As an impediment they can be cut off simply by neglecting to exercise them and by abandoning concern for their success.

## Approaching the Good Friend

The path of practice leading to the jhānas is an arduous course involving specific subjects of contemplation, precise techniques, and skillfulness in dealing with the pitfalls that lie along the way. The knowledge of how to attain the jhānas has been transmitted through a lineage of teachers going back to the time of the Buddha himself. Each teacher passes his store of accumulated knowledge and experience on to his successor pupils, thus ensuring the continuity of the tradition. A prospective meditator is advised to avail himself of the living heritage of practice by placing himself under the care of a qualified teacher. The teacher will assign him a subject of meditation appropriate for his temperament, instruct him in the methods of developing it, and guide his steps along the path.

Unlike other Indian traditions, which focus upon the guru figure as an embodiment of divinity or a link between the disciple and the divine, Theravāda Buddhism has always stressed the pedagogic role of the teacher. This much is indicated by the term selected in the Pāli texts to designate the teacher of meditation, kalyā5amitta, meaning “good (or noble) friend.” The teacher is not the path or an incarnation of the divine, equipped with the means to deliverance in his own person. He is essentially an elder friend and guide, who gives guidance along the path he has travelled based on his superior wisdom gained through personal experience. Even the Buddhas themselves can do no more than indicate the path; the rest depends on the efforts of the aspirant.

Nevertheless, the importance of relying on a kalyā5amitta is strongly emphasized in the Theravāda Buddhist tradition. When the Venerable Ānanda approached the Buddha and declared that it seemed to him that reliance on good friends is half of the holy life, the Buddha corrected him with the words that reliance on good friends is the whole of the holy life, for it is reliance on good friends that leads to the practice of the Noble[^p31-1] Eightfold Path. On another occasion, when his attendant Meghiya prematurely sought permission to go off into solitary retreat, the Buddha explained that while the mind is not yet ripe for liberation one thing that leads to its ripening is association with good[^p31-2] friends and companions. The Buddha in fact describes himself as the good friend par[^p31-3] excellence who leads living beings to freedom from birth, aging, suffering, and death.

The good friend has the task of assigning the pupil a meditation subject. The Visuddhimagga points out that to do so the good friend must possess the proper qualifications, such as being worthy of reverence and esteem, uttering profound speech, and having solicitude for the welfare and progress of his disciples. It says that since the Buddha himself is the ideal good friend, while he is alive a meditation subject should be sought directly from him. But after the Buddha’s passing the qualified meditation teachers that remain may be ranked in the following descending series: the great disciples that survive him, an arahat who attains jhānas, a non-returner, a once-returner, stream-enterer, an ordinary man who obtains jhānas, and various masters of the scriptures. After learning of a qualified teacher, the prospective meditator should approach him and take up residence in his monastery. He should not ask for a meditation subject immediately upon arriving, but should first perform the duties of a pupil towards the teacher, doing them with respect and humility. He should pay homage to the teacher in the evening and leave when dismissed. Then after ten days or two weeks have passed, he should create an opportunity to see the teacher. When all conditions are favorable, he can explain the reason for his coming. He should dedicate himself to the Buddha and to the teacher, then[^p32-1] with a sincere inclination and resolution ask for a subject of meditation.

The teacher assigns a meditation subject that is suitable for the disciple’s temperament. The ancient teachers of the Theravāda tradition recognize six principal character types (carita) into which prospective meditators can be classified: These are: the greedy temperament, the hating temperament, the deluded temperament, the faithful[^p32-2] temperament, the intelligent temperament, and the speculative temperament. Which temperament prevails in a particular person is determined by previously accumulated kamma. On the basis either of the power of penetrating others’ minds, or by personal observation, or by questioning, the teacher will size up the temperament of his new pupil; then he will select a meditation subject for him appropriate to his temperament.

## The Subjects of Serenity-meditation

The various meditation subjects that the Buddha prescribed on different occasions for the development of serenity have been systematized in the commentaries into a set called the forty kamma((hānas. The word kamma((hāna means literally a place of work. It is applied to the subjects of meditation since these are the places where the meditator undertakes the work pertaining to his calling, the work of meditation. An equivalent term occurring in the texts in āramma5a, meaning “object” in general, but in this context the object focussed on in developing concentration.

The forty meditation subjects are distributed into seven categories. They are enumerated in the Visuddhimagga as follows: ten kasi5as, ten kinds of foulness, ten recollections,[^p33-1] four divine abidings, four immaterial states, one perception, and one defining.

A kasi5a is a device representing a particular quality used as a support for concentration. The ten kasi5as are the earth kasi5a, water kasi5a, fire kasi5a, wind kasi5a, blue kasi5a, yellow kasi5a, red kasi5a, white kasi5a, light kasi5a, and limited space kasi5a. The word kasi5a has the meaning of “entirety” (sakala((hena). It is extended to these ten objects of meditation in that each represents the entire quality appropriate to itself. As used in the manuals of meditation, a kasi5a can signify any of three items: first the ma5>ala, the circle or other physical object used as the initial subject of concentration; second the nimitta, the mental image of the object obtained from repeated contemplation of the device; and third the jhāna that arises from meditation on the nimitta. Here kasi5a is used to indicate principally the physical basis for concentration. This can be either a naturally occuring form of the element or color chosen, or an artificially produced device such as a colored or elemental disk that the meditator can use at his convenience in his meditation quarters.

The ten kinds of foulness are ten stages in the decomposition of a corpse. These are: the bloated, the livid, the festering, the cut-up, the gnawed, the scattered, the hacked and scattered, the bleeding, the worm-infested, and a skeleton. The primary purpose behind these meditations is to reduce sensual lust by gaining a clear perception of the repulsiveness of the body. In order to gain the “sign” of the corpses, actual dead bodies have to be seen. Thence these subjects are also known as the cemetery meditations.

The ten recollections are: the recollections of the Buddha, the Dhamma, the Sangha, morality, generosity, and the deities, mindfulness of death, mindfulness of the body, mindfulness of breathing, and the recollection of peace. The first three are devotional contemplations on the sublime qualities of the “three jewels”, the primary objects of Buddhist veneration. The second three are reflections on two cardinal Buddhist virtues and on the devas inhabiting the heavenly worlds, intended principally for those still intent on a higher rebirth. Mindfulness of death is reflection on the inevitability of death, a constant spur to spiritual exertion. Mindfulness of the body involves the mental dissection of the body into thirty-two parts, undertaken with a view to perceiving its unattractiveness. Mindfulness of breathing is awareness of the in-and-out movement of the breath, perhaps the most fundamental of all Buddhist meditation subjects. And the recollection of peace is reflection on the qualities of nibbāna.

The four divine abidings are the development of boundless loving-kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity. These meditations are also called the “immeasurables” (appamaññā) because they are to be developed towards all sentient beings without qualification or exclusiveness.

The four immaterial states are the base of boundless space, the base of boundless consciousness, the base of nothingness, and the base of neither perception nor non-perception. These are the objects leading to the four corresponding meditative attainments called the imaterial jhānas (arūpajjhāna), immaterial deliverances (āruppā vimokkhā) or immaterial attainments (arūpasamāpatti).

The one perception is the perception of the repulsiveness of food. The one defining is the defining of the four elements, that is, the analysis of the physical body into the elemental modes of solidity, fluidity, heat, and oscillation.

The forty kamma((hānas are treated in the Pāli commentarial texts from two important angles – one their ability to induce different levels of concentration, the other their suitability for different temperaments.

Not all meditation subjects are equally effective in inducing the deeper levels of concentration. As we explained above, beyond the preliminary stage of initial concentration (parikammasamādhi) concentration can occur either at the level of access concentration (upacārasamādhi) or at the level of absorption concentration (appanāsamādhi), depending upon the strength of the jhāna factors in the meditative state. Absorption too, consisting in the eight attainments – the four lower jhānas and the four āruppas – can occur at the different levels corresponding to these eight attainments. Therefore the forty kamma((hānas are first distinguished on the basis of their capacity for inducing only access or for inducing full absorption as well; then those able to induce absorption are distinguished further according to their ability to induce the different levels of jhāna.

Of the forty subjects, ten are capable of leading only to access concentration. These are eight recollections – i.e., those excepting mindfulness of the body and mindfulness of breathing – plus the perception of repulsiveness in nutriment and the defining of the four elements. Cultivation of these subjects can cause the hindrances to subside and the jhāna factors to become manifest. However, because they are occupied with a diversity of qualities and involve an active application of discursive thought they cannot lead concentration beyond the stage of access. The other thirty subjects can all lead to absorption.

Of these latter, the ten kasi5as and mindfulness of breathing bring all four jhānas their efficiency in this regard due apparently to their simplicity and freedom from thought construction. The ten kinds of foulness and mindfulness of the body bring only the first jhāna, being limited because consciousness can only hold onto them with the aid of applied thought (vitakka), which is absent in the second and higher jhānas. The first three divine abidings can induce the lower three jhānas but not the fourth, since they arise in association with pleasant feeling (sukha), present in the first three jhānas but replaced by neutral feeling in the fourth. Conversely, because it requires the company of neutral feeling and cannot coexist with pleasant feeling, the divine abiding of equanimity occurs only at the level of the fourth jhāna, where neutral feeling gains ascendency. The four immaterial states conduce to the respective immaterial jhānas corresponding to their names; but because these latter are identical in factorial

constitution with the fourth jhāna, differing only in their objects, the four immaterial states are said to lead to the fourth jhāna.

Since in the main section of the present work we wish to follow the progress of meditation through all four jhānas, we will presume the case of a meditator who has taken as his meditation-subject either a kasi5a or mindfulness of breathing.

The forty kamma((hānas are also differentiated according to their appropriateness for different character types. The principal temperaments recognized for this purpose are, as we said, six – the greedy, the hating, the deluded, the faithful, the intelligent, and the speculative. The danger of oversimplification involved in this scheme has been acknowledged by ancient teachers, and the possibility of complex combinations of traits finds ready affirmation. But the sixfold typology is taken to be sufficient as a pragmatic guideline for the purpose it is intended to serve, the assignment of a suitable subject to a meditator.

The Visuddhimagga divides the forty kamma((hānas among the different temperaments as follows. The ten kinds of foulness and mindfulness of the body, clearly intended to attenuate sensual desire, are eleven subjects suitable for those of greedy temperament. Eight subjects, the four divine abidings and four color kasi5as, are appropriate for the[^p35-1] hating temperament. Mindfulness of breathing is one recollection suitable for those of the deluded and the speculative temperaments. The first six recollections are appropriate for the faithful temperament. Four subjects – mindfulness of death, the recollection of peace, the defining of the four elements, and the perception of repulsiveness in nutriment – are especially effective for those of intelligent temperament. The remaining six kasi5as and the immaterial states are suitable for all kinds of temperaments. But the kasi5as should be limited in size for one of speculative temperament and large in size for[^p35-2] one of deluded temperament.

Immediately after giving this breakdown Buddhaghosa adds a proviso to prevent misunderstanding. He states that this division by way of temperament is made on the basis of direct opposition and complete suitability, but actually there is no wholesome form of meditation that does not suppress the defilements and cultivate virtuous mental factors. He then cites a passage from the Meghiya Sutta advising a single meditator to meditate on foulness to abandon lust, on loving kindness to abandon hatred, on breathing to cut off discursive thought, and on impermanence to eliminate the conceit “I[^p35-3] am”.

## Choosing a Suitable Dwelling

The teacher assigns a meditation subject to his pupil appropriate to his character, and then explains the methods of developing it. He can teach it gradually to a pupil who is going to remain in close proximity to him, or in detail to one who will go to practice it elsewhere. If the disciple is not going to stay with his teacher he must be careful to select a suitable place for meditation. The Visuddhimagga mentions eighteen kinds of monasteries unfavorable to the development of jhāna: a large monastery, a new one, a dilapidated one, one near a road, one with a pond, leaves, flowers, or fruits, one sought after by many people, one in cities, among timber or fields, where people quarrel, in a port, in border lands, on a frontier, a haunted place, and one without access to a spiritual[^p36-1] teacher. Unless he is already highly developed a novice meditator should avoid a dwelling with these faults.

The factors which make a dwelling favorable to meditation are mentioned by the Buddha himself. These are five in number:

1. it should be not too far from or too near a village that can be relied on as an alms resort, and should have a clear path;

2. it should be quiet and secluded;

3. it should be free from inclemencies of weather and from harmful insects and animals;

4. it should be easy to obtain the four requisites while dwelling there; and

5. the dwelling should provide ready access to learned elders and spiritual friends[^p36-2] who can be consulted when problems arise in meditation. The types of dwelling places commended by the Buddha most frequently in the suttas as conducive to the jhānas are a secluded dwelling in the forest, at the foot of a tree, on a mountain, in a cleft, in a cave, in a cemetery, on a wooded flatland, in the open[^p36-3] air, or on a heap of straw. Having found a suitable dwelling and settled there, the disciple should maintain scrupulous observance of the rules of discipline. He should be content with his simple requisites, exercise control over his sense faculties, be mindful and discerning in all activities and practice meditation diligently as he was instructed. It is at this point that he meets the first great challenge of his contemplative life, the battle with the five hindrances.

[^p25-1]: “ĀkaKkheyya ce bhikkhave bhikkhu: catunnaJ jhānānaJ abhicetasikānaJ di::hadhamma- sukhavihārānaJ nikāmalābhī assaJ akicchalābhī akasiralābhī ti – sīles’ev’assa paripūrakārī.” MN. 1:33.
[^p25-2]: “Dussīlassa bhikkhave sīlavipannassa hatūpaniso hoti sammāsamādhi… sīlavato bhikkhave sīlasampan- nassa upanisāsampanno hoti sammāsamādhi.” AN. 3:19-20.
[^p26-1]: AN. 5:1-7.
[^p27-1]: DN. 1:60ff. MN. 1:179ff.
[^p27-2]: DN. 1:60ff. MN. 1:179ff.
[^p27-3]: For a detailed treatment of the fourfold purification of morality see Vism., pp. 13-37; PP., pp. 16-46.
[^p28-1]: PP., p. 16. “ldha bhikkhu pātimokkhasaJvarasaJvuto viharati, ācāragocarasampanno anumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī, samādāya sikkhati sikkhāpadesu.” Vibha/gapāli, [Pāli Text in Burmese script], (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1958), p.253 (hereafter cited as Vibh.).
[^p28-2]: A corresponding code of discipline containing about350 rules was established for bhikkhunis, the original order of Buddhist nuns, but as the Bhikkhuni-sangha has become defunct this code no longer continues with its full force. However, there exist in Theravāda lands independently ordained nuns who do their best to live in accordance with the standards established by the original Pātimokkha for bhikkhunis.
[^p28-3]: PP., p. 16. “So cakkhunā rūpaJ disvā na nimittaggāhī hoti nānubyañjanaggāhī, yatvādhikaraLaJ enaJ cakkhundriyaJ asaJvutaJ – viharantaJ abhijjhādomanassā pāpakā akusalā dhammā anvassāveyyuJ, tassa saJvarāya pa:ipajjati, rakkhati cakkhundriyaJ cakkhundriye saJvaraJ āpajjati.” MN. 1;l80.
[^p29-1]: pp., p. 31. “Bhikkhu pa:isaKkhā yoniso cīvaraJ pa:isevati. Yāvad’eva sītassa pa:ighātāya uLhassa pa:ighātāya YaJsa makasa-vātātapa-siriJsapa-samphassānaJ pa:ighātāya, yāvadeva hirikopīna-pa:icchā- danatthaJ. Pa:isaJkhā yoniso piLYapātaJ pa:isevati, n’eva davāya na madāya na maLYanāya na vibhūsanāya, yāvad’eva imassa kāyassa:hitiyā yāpanāya vihiJsūparatiyā brahmacariyānuggahāya: iti purāLañ ca vedanaJ pa:ihaKkhāmi navañ ca vedanaJ na uppādessāmi yātra ca me bhavissati anavajjatā ca phāsuvihāro cāti. Pa:isaKkhā yoniso senāsanaJ pa:isevati, yāvad’eva sãtassa pa:ighātāya uLhassa pa:ighā- tāya óaJsamakasa-vātātapa-siriJsapasamphassānaJ pa:ighātāya, yāvad’eva utuparissayavinodanaJ pa:isallānārāmatthaJ. Pa:isaKkhā yoniso gilānapaccaya bhesajjaparikkhāraJ pa:isevati, yāvad’eva uppannānaJ veyyābādhikānaJ vedanānaJ pa:ighātāya abyāpajjhaparamatāya.” MN. 1:10.
[^p30-1]: PP., p. 91. “Āvāso, kula., lābho, ga5o, kamma., addhāna., ñāti, ābādho, gantho, iddhi.” Vism., p. 73.
[^p31-1]: SN. 1:88.
[^p31-2]: AN. 4:354-58.
[^p31-3]: SN. 1:88.
[^p32-1]: PP., p. 100. Vism., p. 80.
[^p32-2]: PP., p. 102. “Rāgacarito, dosacarito, mohacarito, saddhācarito, buddhicarito, vitakkacarito.” Vism., p. 82.
[^p33-1]: PP., p. 112. Vism., p. 89. The Pāli names for the forty kamma((hānas are given in the Appendix 2.
[^p35-1]: Exactly why the color kasi5as are offered as an antidote to hatred is not explained. Perhaps the contemplation of color has a subtle psychological effect of reducing anger and aversion.
[^p35-2]: PP., pp. 117-18. Vism., p. 92-93.
[^p35-3]: PP., p. 118. AN. 4:358.
[^p36-1]: PP., p. 125. Vism., p. 99.
[^p36-2]: PP., pp. 125-26. AN. 5:15.
[^p36-3]: MN. 1:181, 269, 274.
