In the suttas the Buddha expounds the jhānas in a fourfold scheme, the members of which are called the first, second, third, and fourth jhāna. The qualified monk, after fulfilling the preliminary requirements and going off into solitude, passes in turn first from ordinary consciousness into the first jhāna, and then from the first jhāna into each of the succeeding jhānas culminating in the fourth. The attainment of any jhāna comes about through a two-sided process of development. On one side is the elimination of the factors obstructive to attaining the jhāna, on the other the acquisition of the factors producing its attainment. The former set is called its factors of abandonment (pahāna/gāni), the latter its factors of possession (samannāgata/gāni). In the case of the first jhāna the factors of abandonment are the five hindrances (pañcanīvaraṇa) and its factors of possession the basic five jhāna factors (pañcajhāna/gāni). Both sets are spelled out in a passage ascribed to the venerable Sāriputta, the Buddha’s chief disciple:

Your reverence, in regard to the first meditation, five factors are abandoned, five are possessed: if a monk has entered on the first meditation, desire for sense pleasure is abandoned, malevolence is abandoned, sloth and torpor are abandoned, restlessness and worry are abandoned, and doubt is abandoned, but there is initial thought and discursive thought, rapture and joy and onepointedness of mind. Thus, your reverence, in regard to the first meditation,[^p37-1] five factors are abandoned, five factors are possessed.

In this chapter we will focus upon the five hindrances, leaving a detailed consideration of the jhāna factors to the next chapter. The five hindrances comprise sensual desire (kamācchanda), ill will, (byāpāda), sloth and torpor (thīnamiddha), restlessness and worry (uddhaccakukkucca), and doubt (vicikicchā). This group of five merits special attention because it is the principal classification the Buddha uses for the obstacles to meditative development. The defilements included in this group obstruct not only the first jhāna, but the entire thrust of man’s aspiration for the purification and liberation of his mind. They stand like a wall between man’s sensual and self directed thought-patterns and his drive towards higher development, preventing progress in the spheres of both serenity and insight.

We will begin this chapter with a look at the standard canonical description for the attainment of the first jhāna, which opens with an allusion to the hindrances. Then we will give a general overview of the five hindrances followed by a more specific account of each hindrance in turn. From here we will go on to examine the abandonment of the hindrances. This discussion will focus on the Buddha’s systematic approach to the conquest of the hindrances, which views these defilements as originating from particular conditions and to be abandoned by the elimination of their conditions.

## The Entrance to the Jhāna

The Buddha describes the attainment of the first jhāna with a standard formula recurring throughout the Pāli Canon. The formula runs as follows:

Quite secluded from sense pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states of mind, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied[^p38-1] thought and sustained thought with rapture and happiness born of seclusion. (Wr. tr.).

Examination of the formula reveals that it divides into two parts, one indicating the states which must be eliminated to attain the first jhāna, the other the states which accompany and define the jhāna itself. The elimination of obstructive states is covered by the expression “quite secluded from sense pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states of mind” (vivicc’eva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi). The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā and the Visuddhimagga comment upon these expressions in almost identical terms, seeking to relate them to the five hindrances. The commentaries view the phrases “sense pleasures” and “unwholesome states” as an implicit reference to the hindrances, a quite legitimate position since the Buddha has often stressed the need to overcome the hindrances in order to enter the first jhāna.

2 Basing themselves upon the Niddesa and Vibhaṅga the commentaries allow a twofold interpretation of “sense pleasures” (kāmehi). They can be understood in the present context either as objective sense pleasures (vatthukāma), i.e. enticing sense objects which arouse the desire for sensual enjoyment, or as the defilement of sense pleasures (kilesakāma), i.e. the subjective desire for sensual enjoyment itself. According to the commentator the phrase “quite secluded from sense pleasures” serves to show that to attain the first jhāna the yogin must remove himself from sense pleasures, the first hindrance and its objective basis. The need for such separation is dictated by two considerations: first by the fact that sense pleasures are the “enemy” or contrary opposite of the first jhāna, which cannot exist in their presence “just as lamplight cannot exist as long as darkness exists”; and second by the fact that sense pleasures have to be

relinquished to reach the first jhāna “just as the near bank must be relinquished to reach[^p39-1] the further bank.”

If sense pleasures are understood objectively, then the phrase “unwholesome states” (akusalādhamma) is interpreted to mean all unwholesome states, inclusive of sensual desire. In such a case “seclusion from sense pleasures” will signify bodily seclusion (kāyaviveka), physical aloofness from contact with sensually provocative objects, and “seclusion from unwholesome states” will signify mental seclusion (cittaviveka), mental[^p39-2] aloofness from obsession by defilements. On the other hand, if sense pleasures are understood subjectively, they will be equated specifically with one hindrance, the hindrance of sensual desire; the unwholesome states will then be equated with all five hindrances, including sensual desire insofar as it, too, is unwholesome. But to avoid redundancy, the commentary says that when the first phrase is taken to indicate the hindrance of sensual desire, the second should be taken to indicate the remaining four hindrances. In both cases “seclusion” signifies mental seclusion through suppression of the defilements; the use of the plural, kāmehi and dhammehi, suggests the plurality of[^p39-3] forms either class of obsessions can assume.

## The Five Hindrances: General Account

The five defilements which the Buddha designates as the five hindrances are, as we mentioned, sensual desire, ill will, sloth and torpor, restlessness and worry, and doubt. These five receive the name “hindrances” for the reason that they hinder and envelop the[^p39-4] mind.

They hinder and envelop the mind by obstructing the development of meditation in either of its two modes – the mode of serenity (samatha bhāvanā) and the mode of insight (vipassanā bhāvanā). Hence the Buddha calls the five hindrances “obstructions,[^p39-5] hindrances, corruptions of the mind, weakeners of wisdom.” Again he says: “These five

hindrances, monks, are causes of blindness, causes of loss of vision, causes of[^p40-1] unknowing, opposed to wisdom, aligned with vexation, leading away from nibbāna.”

In the suttas the Buddha offers two sets of similes to illustrate the detrimental effect of the hindrances. The first compares the five hindrances unabandoned in oneself to five types of calamity: sensual desire is like a debt, ill will like a disease, sloth and torpor like imprisonment, restlessness and worry like slavery, and doubt like being lost on a desert road. Release from the hindrances is to be seen as freedom from debt, good[^p40-2] health, release from prison, emancipation from slavery, and arriving at a place of safety. The second set of similes compares the hindrances to five kinds of impurities affecting a bowl of water, preventing a keen-sighted man from seeing his own reflection as it really is. The five impurities are appropriately paired off with the hindrances: sensual desire is like a bowl of water mixed with brightly colored paints, ill will like a bowl of boiling water, sloth and torpor like water covered by mossy plants, restlessness and worry like[^p40-3] water blown into ripples by the wind, and doubt like muddy water. Just as the keen-eyed man would not be able to see his reflection in these five kinds of water, so

when one dwells with his mind obsessed and overwhelmed by sensual desire (ill will, sloth and torpor, restlessness and worry, and doubt), without understanding as it is the escape from these arisen obsessions, then one does not[^p40-4] know and see as it is one’s own good, the good of others, or the good of both. (Wr. tr.).

Because the five hindrances are the states especially obstructive to the first jhāna they are called the first jhāna’s “factors of abandoning” (pahāna/gāni). The factors of[^p40-5] abandonment are the states which have to be abandoned in order for the jhāna to arise. But the singling out of these five factors should not be taken to imply that they are the only states antithetical to the first jhāna or the only defilements abandoned when the jhāna is attained. To forestall this suspicion Buddhaghosa points out, in his exegesis of the first jhāna formula, that the two phrases “secluded from sense pleasures” (vivicc’eva kāmehi) and “secluded from unwholesome states of mind” (vivicca akusalehi dhammehi) cover other categories of defilements besides the hindrances. Of the three unwholesome roots (akusalamūla), the first covers greed, the second hatred and delusion. Of the floods (ogha), bonds (yoga), cankers (āsava), clingings (upādāna), bodily ties (gantha), and fetters (sa.yojana), the first phrase covers the flood, bond, canker, and clinging of sensual desire, the bodily tie of covetousness, and the fetter of sensual desire; the second phrase covers the remaining members of these groups.

Among the unwholesome states of consciousness mentioned in the Abhidhamma, the first phrase indicates the eight classes of consciousness rooted in greed, the second the remaining four classes of unwholesome cousciousness – those rooted in aversion and[^p41-1] strong delusion.

Nevertheless, despite this diversity of defilements opposed to the first jhāna, the five hindrances alone are called its factors of abandoning. The principal reason behind this selection, according to the Visuddhimagga, is that “although other unprofitable things too are abandoned at the moment of jhāna, still only these are specifically obstructive to[^p41-2] jhāna.” Buddhaghosa goes on to show how each hindrance impedes the mind’s capacity for concentration:

The mind affected through lust by greed for varied objective fields does not become concentrated on an object consisting in unity, or being overwhelmed by lust, it does not enter on the way to abandoning the sense-desire element. When pestered by ill will towards an object, it does not occur uninterruptedly. When overcome by stiffness and torpor, it is unwieldy. When seized by agitation and worry, it is unquiet and buzzes about. When stricken by uncertainty, it fails to mount the way to accomplish the attainment of jhāna. So it is these only that are called factors of abandoning because they are[^p41-3] specifically obstructive to jhāna.

A second reason for confining the first jhāna’s factors of abandoning to the five hindrances is to permit a direct alignment to be made between the hindrances and the jhāna factors (jhāna/gāni). The jhāna factors are five mental phenomena which strengthen concentration and lift the mind to the level of jhāna. The five are applied thought (vitakka), sustained thought (vicāra), rapture (pīti), happiness (sukha) and one-pointedness (ekaggatā). Since the five remain in the first jhāna they come to be called its “factors of possession” (samannāgata/gāni). Buddhaghosa states that the abandonment of the five hindrances alone is mentioned in connection with jhāna for the reason that the hindrances are the direct enemies of the five factors:

Only the hindrances are mentioned subsequently in the Vibhaṅga… in order to show their opposition to, and incompatibility with, the jhāna factors. For the hindrances are the contrary opposites of the jhāna factors: what is meant is

that the jhāna factors are incompatible with them, eliminate them, abolish[^p42-1] them.

To support his contention the commentator cites a passage he ascribes to the Pe:aka demonstrating a one-to-one correspondence between the jhāna factors and hindrances:

Concentration is incompatible with lust, happiness [rapture] with ill will, applied thought with stiffness and torpor, bliss [happiness] with agitation and[^p42-2] worry, and sustained thought with uncertainty [doubt].

Thus each jhāna factor is seen as being assigned the specific task of eliminating and abolishing a particular obstruction to the jhāna. To correlate these obstructions with the five jhāna factors they are ordered into a scheme of five hindrances.

The same principle also serves to explain the rationale behind the coupling that takes place in two of the hindrances, “sloth and torpor” and “restlessness and worry.” In an important passage which anticipates the analytical precision of the Abhidhamma the Buddha demonstrates a method by which the five hindrances become tenfold. This is done by dividing three hindrances into two each according to whether they take internal or external objects, and the two compound hindrances into two each by way of their pairs of components:

What, monks, is the method of explanation according to which the five hindrances become ten?

Sensual desire towards the internal, monks – that is a hindrance; sensual desire towards the external – that is a hindrance. Thus the hindrance of sensual desire that comes down in the summary by this method becomes twofold.

Ill will towards the internal, monks – that is a hindrance; ill will towards the external – that is a hindrance. Thus the hindrance of ill will that comes down in the summary by this method becomes twofold.

Sloth, monks, is a hindrance; torpor is a hindrance. Thus the hindrance of sloth and torpor that comes down in the summary by this method becomes twofold.

Restlessness, monks, is a hindrance; worry is a hindrance. Thus the hindrance of restlessness and worry that comes down in the summary by this method becomes twofold.

Doubt towards internal phenomena, monks, is a hindrance; doubt towards externals is a hindrance. Thus the hindrance of doubt that comes down in the summary by this method becomes twofold.

This, monks, is the method of explanation according to which the five 1 hindrances are ten. (Wr. tr.).

Thus when analyzed into distinct mental factors (cetasika) the five hindrances break down into seven separate states: sensual desire, ill will, sloth, torpor, restlessness, worry, and doubt. This raises the question why the seven defilements obstructive to the first jhāna are presented as only five hindrances rather than as seven. The reason for this peculiarity of arrangement again seems to lie in the economy required to set the jhāna-factors and hindrances in direct opposition. Since there are five jhāna factors the defilements they oppose must likewise be five. Sloth and torpor on the one side, and restlessness and worry on the other, readily lend themselves to the required coupling. For sloth and torpor share the common feature of mental ailment or indisposition, the former[^p43-2] of consciousness itself and the latter of its concomitants. Restlessness and worry, likewise, share the common feature of agitating or disturbing the mind. Thus it is natural that a single jhāna factor should be capable of opposing and silencing the two hindrances in each set. According to the method cited in the Visuddhimagga, sloth and torpor are both countered by applied thought, restlessness and worry are both countered[^p43-3] by happiness. In this way the mutual exclusion of hindrances and jhāna factors becomes the ground for the grouping of the hindrances into a fivefold set.

1. “Katamo, ca bhikkhave pariyāyo yaJ pariyāyaJ āgamma pañca nīvaraLā dasa honti? Yad api bhikkhave ajjhattaJ kāmacchando tad api nīvaraLaJ. Yad api bahiddhā kāmacchando tad api

## The Five Hindrances: Specific Account

Sensual Desire (kāmacchanda) The hindrance of sensual desire is desire for sense pleasures, “sense pleasures” (kāma)[^p44-1] here being equated with the “five strands of sense pleasures (pañca kāmaguṇā). The five strands of sense pleasure are visible forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and tangibles[^p44-2] which are “desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, sensuous, stimulating lust.” (Wr. tr.). Desire for sense pleasures appears in the suttas under a variety of names. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi, the first book of the Abhidhamma-pi:aka, collects together all these names in its definition of the hindrance of sensual desire:

That sensual desire, sensual passion, sensual delight, sensual craving, sensual fondness, sensual fever, sensual languishing, sensual rapacity which is excited[^p44-3] by the pleasure of the senses – this is called the hindrance of sensual desire.

This first hindrance thus coincides in meaning with the canker (āsava), flood (ogha), and bond (yoga) of sensuality, with the fetter of sensual lust (kāmarāgasa.yojana), and with the clinging to sense pleasures (kāmūpādāna). Sensual desire is a form of the root-defilement of greed (lobha). The Visuddhimagga explains greed in terms of the four defining categories commonly found in the commentaries – characteristic, function, manifestation, and proximate cause – with an illustration given as a fifth:

Greed has the characteristic of grasping an object, like birdlime (lit. ‘monkey lime’). Its function is sticking, like meat put in a hot pan. It is manifested as not giving up, like the dye of lampblack. Its proximate cause is seeing enjoyment in things that lead to bondage. Swelling with the current of craving, it should be regarded as taking [beings] with it to states of loss, as a[^p44-4] swift-flowing river does to the great ocean.

Sensual desire is distinct in nature from other types of desire. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā differentiates it from the desire to accomplish some aim (kattukamyatā) as[^p44-5] well as from the desire for Dhamma (dhammacchanda). As a form of greed the first is

invariably unwholesome, the second can assume both wholesome and unwholesome forms, the last is exclusively wholesome.

Ill will (byāpāda) Ill will is used in the suttas as an equivalent for hatred (dosa) and aversion (pa(igha). All three signify resentment directed towards disagreeable persons or objects. Like the other defilements, ill will can either remain inwardly contained or can express itself outwardly. In the latter form it motivates actions such as killing, harsh speech, outbreaks of violence, etc. Thus we find that in the Potaliya Sutta the word nivara5a is given an extended meaning capable of covering the actions manifesting the internal hindrance: “This is indeed a fetter, this is a hindrance, that is to say onslaught on creatures…[^p45-1] slanderous speech… angry fault-finding… wrathful rage.” Such actions become fetters and hindrances because they stir into activity the fetter and hindrance of ill will, reinforcing its detrimental influence upon moral and spiritual development.

The Dhammasaṅgaṇi defines the hindrance of ill will in its usual way by bringing together its numerous canonical synonyms:

What is the hindrance of ill will? When annoyance springs up at the thought: ‘He has done me harm, is doing, will do me harm; he has done harm, is doing harm, will do harm to someone dear and precious to me; he has conferred a benefit, is conferring, will confer a benefit on someone I dislike and object to; or when annoyance springs up groundlessly: all such vexation, indignation, hate, antipathy, abhorrence, mental disorder, detestation, anger, fuming, irascibility, hate, hating, hatred, disorder, getting upset, derangement, opposition, hostility, churlishness, abruptness, disgust of heart – this is called[^p45-2] the hindrance of ill will.

The Visuddhimagga explains hatred thus:

It has the characteristic of savageness, like a provoked snake. Its function is to spread, like a drop of poison, or its function is to burn up its own support, like a forest fire. It is manifested as persecuting (dusana), like an enemy who has[^p45-3] got his chance. Its proximate cause is the grounds for annoyance.

Sloth and torpor (Thīnamiddha) As we saw, the Buddha explains sloth and torpor as a compound hindrance which can be regarded as twofold in terms of its components. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi follows this suggestion through by breaking the compound down into its members and giving separate definitions of sloth (thīna) and of torpor (middha):

What is the hindrance of stolidity [sloth] and torpor? First distinguish between stolidity [sloth] and torpor. In this connection, what is stolidity [sloth]? That which is indisposition, unwieldiness of intellect (citta) adhering and cohering, clinging, cleaving to, stickiness, stolidity [sloth], that is a stiffening, a rigidity of the intellect – this is called stolidity [sloth].

What is torpor? That which is indisposition and unwieldiness of sense (lit. body), a shrouding, enveloping, barricading within, torpor that is sleep, drowsiness, sleep, slumbering, somnolence – this is called torpor.

Now this is the stolidity [sloth] and this is the torpor which are called ‘the[^p46-1] hindrance of stolidity [sloth] and torpor’.

When the Dhammasaṅgaṇi speaks of sloth as cittassa akallatā akammaññata, “indisposition and unwieldiness of intellect (or mind)”, this should be understood to signify the incapacitation of the mind in its function as consciousness, the principal instrument of cognition. And when the text speaks of torpor as kāyassa akallatā akammaññatā, literally “indisposition and unwieldiness of the body,” this should be understood to signify the incapacitation of the “mental body” (nāmakāya) made up of the mental factors (cetasika) concomitant with consciousness. Thence the Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā, in elucidating these definitions, equates kàya with the “mental body[^p46-2] consisting of the three aggregates,” i.e., the groups of feeling, perception, and mental formations. Thus sloth represents a state of inertia on the cognitive or intellective side of the mental process, torpor a corresponding condition on the affective, perceptual and volitional sides. The same point is brought out by the Dīghanikāya Aṭṭhakathā when it glosses sloth as “a sickness of consciousness” and torpor as “a sickness of the mental[^p46-3] factors” or “sickness of the three aggregates,” (Wr. tr.) the mental factors being identical with the three mental aggregates – feeling, perception, and volition –

co-existing with consciousness. Though the Dhammasaṅgaṇi defines torpor with a number of synonyms suggestive of physical sleep, its commentary takes pains to point out that what is intended as a hindrance is not the physical tiredness which necessitates sleep, but the indolence and mental obscuration which accompany sleepiness in the case of unliberated individuals.

The Visuddhimagga follows the lead of the suttas and Abhidhamma in also giving separate definitions of sloth and torpor consistent with those in the other commentaries:

Herein, stiffness [sloth] has the characteristic of lack of driving power. Its function is to remove energy. It is manifested as subsiding. Torpor has the characteristic of unwieldiness. Its function is to smother. It is manifested as laziness, or it is manifested as nodding and sleep. The proximate cause of both[^p47-1] is unwise attention to boredom, sloth, and so on.

Restlessness and Worry (Uddhaccakukkucca) As in the previous case, here too the Buddha divides this compound hindrance into its two components before recombining them into one: “Restlessness, monks, is a hindrance; worry is a hindrance. Thus the hindrance of restlessness and worry that[^p47-2] comes down in the summary by this method becomes twofold.” The Dhammasaṅgaṇi again picks up on this method and defines the two terms separately:

What is the hindrance of excitement [restlessness] and worry? What is excitement? That excitement of mind which is disquietude, agitation of heart, turmoil of mind: that is called excitement [restlessness].

What is worry? Consciousness of what is lawful in something that is unlawful; consciousness of what is unlawful in something that is lawful; consciousness of what is immoral in something that is moral; consciousness of what is moral in something that is immoral: all this sort of worry, fidgeting, overscrupulousness, remorse of conscience, mental scarifying – this is what is called worry. Now this is excitement [restlessness] and this is the worry which[^p47-3] are what is called ‘the hindrance of excitement [restlessness] and worry.’

The Visuddhimagga also gives separate treatment to restlessness and worry, explicating each in terms of the familiar defining categories. With regard to restlessness the treatise says:

It has the characteristic of disquiet, like water whipped by the wind. Its function is unsteadiness, like a flag or banner whipped by the wind. It is manifested as turmoil, like ashes flung up by pelting with stones. Its proximate cause is unwise attention to mental disquiet. It should be regarded[^p48-1] as distraction of consciousness.

Worry is explained in the following way:

It has subsequent regret as its characteristic. Its function is to sorrow about what has and what has not been done. It is manifested as remorse. Its proximate cause is what has and what has not been done. It should be regarded[^p48-2] as slavery”.

Doubt (Vicikicchā) The Buddha explains doubt as principally uncertainty and lack of conviction in regard to[^p48-3] four items: the Buddha, the Dhamma, the Sangha, and the training. Elsewhere he speaks of perplexity regarding the past, the present, and the future, and again about the[^p48-4] removal of doubt in regard to dependent arising. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi says:

To doubt, to be perplexed about the Master… the Doctrine… the Order, about the Discipline, about the past, the future, about both the past and the future, as to whether there be an assignable cause of states causally determined – it is this kind of doubt, this working of doubt, this dubiety, puzzlement, perplexity, distraction, standing at cross-roads; collapses, uncertainty of grasp; evasion, hesitation, incapacity of grasping thoroughly, stiffness of mind, mental[^p48-5] scarifying that is called perplexity [hindrance of doubt].

The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā explains that doubt in regard to the Master is doubt as to whether or not any person has existed endowed with the physical and spiritual qualities of a Buddha. Doubt regarding the Doctrine is doubt about the existence of the supramundane paths, fruits, and nibbāna. Doubt regarding the Sangha is skepticism with respect to the existence of holy persons or the fruitfulness of gifts to the Order. Doubt regarding the discipline questions the effectiveness of morality, concentration, and

wisdom in leading to the end of suffering. Doubt regarding the past, future, and both applies to past lives, future lives, and both. And doubt regarding causally determined[^p49-1] states is perplexity over the twelvefold formulation of dependent arising.

It is evident from these definitions and descriptions that the species of doubt classed as a hindrance is skeptical indecision with respect to the fundamental tenets of Buddhist doctrine and practice. The doubt to be abandoned is not the freedom of philosophical inquiry, which the Buddha openly encouraged in those who sought to gain personal conviction of truth, but stubborn disbelief and perplexity regarding the principles needed for higher development. As long as such doubt persists, the mind is too obscured by confusion to embark on the path leading to higher attainments. As the Visuddhimagga says, doubt has the function of wavering, the manifestation of indecisiveness, and it acts[^p49-2] as an obstruction to practice.

## Seclusion from the Hindrances

Kinds of Seclusion The stock passage describing the attainment of the first jhāna, with which we began the present chapter, says that the jhāna is attained by a bhikkhu who is “secluded from sense[^p49-3] pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states of mind’. Now that we have determined the purport of the phrase “unwholesome states of mind” to be the five hindrances, we must inquire into the meaning of the word “seclusion” (viveka). The Visuddhimagga in its gloss of this passage, explains that there are three kinds of seclusion relevant to the present context – namely, bodily seclusion (kāyaviveka), mental seclusion (cittaviveka),[^p49-4] and seclusion by suppression (vikkhambhanaviveka). These three terms allude to two distinct sets of exegetical categories, which must be considered to bring their meaning to light.

The first two terms pertain to a threefold arrangement made up of bodily seclusion, mental seclusion, and “seclusion from the substance” (upadhi viveka). The first means physical withdrawal from active social engagement into a condition of solitude for the purpose of devoting time and energy to spiritual development. The second, which generally presupposes success in the first, means the seclusion of the mind from its entanglement in defilements and distracted thoughts; it is in effect equivalent to jhāna, or at least the access level of concentration (upacāra samādhi). The third, “seclusion[^p49-5] from the substance,” is nibbāna, liberation from the elements of phenomenal existence. The achievement of the first jhāna does not depend on the third, from which it is still quite remote, but it does require physical solitude and the separation of the mind from

obsessions. Hence the Visuddhimagga mentions bodily and mental seclusion as pre-conditions for entering the jhāna, the former applying particularly to sense stimuli. the latter to the hindrances.

The third type of seclusion pertinent to the context, seclusion by suppression, belongs to a different scheme generally discussed under the heading of “abandonment” (pahāna) rather than “seclusion.” The basis for this classificatory set is a passage in the canonical exegetical work, the Pa:isambhidāmagga, recording five kinds of abandoning: “abandoning by suppression, by substitution of opposites, by cutting off, by tranquilization[^p50-1], and by deliverance.” (Wr. tr.).

The Pa:isambhidāmagga explains them as follows:

For one developing the first jhāna, the hindrances are abandoned by way of suppression. For one developing concentration partaking of penetration, wrong views are abandoned by way of substitution of opposites. For one developing the supramundane path that leads to their destruction, (defilements) are abandoned by way of cutting off. At the moment of fruition they are abandoned by way of tranquillization. And abandoning by deliverance[^p50-2] is nibbāna, cessation. (Wr. tr.).

These five types of abandonment are elucidated more fully in the commentaries.

1. The Visuddhimagga says that “abandoning by suppression” occurs whenever “any of[^p50-3] the mundane kinds of concentration suppresses opposing states such as the hindrances,” as illustrated by the pressing down of water-weed by placing a porous pot on weedfilled water. Though the canonical text mentions only the first jhāna as an example, Buddhaghosa remarks that this is mentioned because suppression is obvious then, but suppression also occurs before and after the jhāna, when the hindrances do not invade[^p50-4] consciousness by reason of the force of concentration.

2. The “abandoning by substitution of opposites” is defined as

the abandoning of any given state that ought to be abandoned through the means of a particular factor of knowledge, which as a constituent of insight is opposed to it, like the abandoning of darkness at night through the means of[^p50-5] light.

This type of abandoning, in other words, represents a form of factor-substitution in which the arising of a particular species of insight-knowledge cancels out and vanquishes a corresponding kind of error. The Visuddhimagga cites as examples the abandoning of the perceptions of permanence, pleasure, and self through the contemplations of impermanence, suffering, and non-self, the principal forms of[^p51-1] insight-knowledge. Its commentary adds that insight is not the only type of abandoning by substitution of opposites, since the latter can also occur in other ways such as through[^p51-2] the purification of morality, which replaces unwholesome states with wholesome ones.

3. “Abandoning by cutting off” is a name for “the abandoning of the states beginning with the fetters by the noble path knowledge in such a way that they never occur again,[^p51-3] like a tree struck by a thunderbolt.” This mode of abandoning comes about when the supramundane wisdom of the noble path consciousness eradicates the seeds or latencies of the defilements severing the possibility of their re-occurrence.

4. “‘Abandoning by tranquillization’ is the tranquillizing or subsiding of the defilements[^p51-4] at the moments of ‘fruition’ following the noble path consciousness” (Wr. tr.). It marks the release consequent upon the destruction of defilements effected by the path.

5. “‘Abandoning by deliverance’ is nibbāna, in which all that is conditioned is[^p51-5] abandoned by deliverance from all that is conditioned.” (Wr. tr.).

Thus when the Visuddhimagga says that the achievement of the first jhāna is contingent on seclusion by suppression, we must understand this to mean that it requires the abandonment of the hindrances by way of the abandoning by suppression.

The Plane of Abandonment The abandoning of the five hindrances is a necessary condition for the attainment of the first jhāna. The abandoning of the hindrances does not by itself necessarily indicate that the first jhāna has been achieved, but in order for the jhāna to be achieved the hindrances have to be abandoned. The type of abandoning relevant to the attainment of jhāna is abandoning by suppression. The suppression of the hindrances prepares the mind for entrance upon the jhāna by creating a situation conducive to its actualization. The jhāna and suppression can thus be understood to exist in a relationship where the

arising of the jhāna is dependent on the prior suppression of the hindrances, and the persistence of the hindrances is obstructive to the attainment of the jhāna.

The work of suppressing the hindrances begins with the first efforts to focus the mind in concentration upon one of the prescribed objects for the development of jhāna, such as the kasi5as. As the meditator fixes his mind on the initial object, a point is reached where he can apprehend the object as clearly with his eyes closed as with them open.[^p52-1] This visualized object is called the “learning sign” (uggahanimitta). As he concentrates on the learning sign, his efforts call into play certain mental factors intermittently present in normal consciousness but which now grow in force, duration, and prominence as a result of the meditative exertion. These mental factors activated by the preliminary work of concentration are applied thought (vitakka), sustained thought (vicāra), rapture (pīti), happiness (sukha), and one-pointedness (ekaggatā). When they reach full maturity they will become the jhāna-factors, but in the preliminary stage of concentration they represent the jhāna only in embryonic form. These factors are incompatible with the hindrances and function as their precise antidotes. Thence their repeated cultivation excludes the hindrances, attenuates them, and holds them at bay. As the Visuddhimagga explains:

The hindrances are the contrary opposites of the jhāna factors: what is meant is that the jhāna factors are incompatible with them, eliminate them, abolish them. And it is said accordingly in the Pe:aka: ‘Concentration is incompatible with lust, happiness with ill will, applied thought with stiffness and torpor,[^p52-2] bliss with agitation and worry, and sustained thought with uncertainty’.

With continued practice the “learning sign” gives rise to a purified luminous[^p52-3] reproduction of itself called the “counterpart sign” (paṭibhāga nimitta). The manifestation of the counterpart sign marks the complete suppression of the hindrances and the attainment of a degree of concentration known as “access concentration” (upacārasamādhi): “But as soon as it (counterpart sign) arises the hindrances are quite suppressed, the defilements subside, and the mind becomes concentrated in access[^p52-4] concentration.”

All three events – the suppression of the hindrances, the arising of the counterpart sign, and the entrance upon access concentration – take place at precisely the same moment, without interval. And though previously the process of mental cultivation may have required the elimination of different hindrances at different times, when access is achieved they all subside together:

Simultaneously with his acquiring the counterpart sign his lust is abandoned by suppression owing to his giving no attention externally to sense desires (as object). And owing to his abandoning of approval, ill will is abandoned too, as pus is with the abandoning of blood. Likewise stiffness and torpor is abandoned through exertion of energy, agitation and worry is abandoned through devotion to peaceful things that cause no remorse; and uncertainty about the Master who teaches the way, about the way, and about the fruit of the way, is abandoned through the actual experience of the distinction[^p53-1] attained. So the five hindrances are abandoned.

The term “access concentration” does not appear as such in the four main nikāyas of the Suttapi:aka, but only in the commentaries. However, a state intermediate between normal consciousness and full concentration, in which the hindrances are overcome, is clearly implied by a number of passages. Thus in the Sāmaññaphala Sutta it is said:

But when these five hindrances have been put away within him, he looks upon himself as freed from debt, rid of disease, out of jail, a free man, and secure.

And gladness springs up within him on his realising that, and joy arises to him thus gladdened, and so rejoicing all his frame becomes at ease, and being thus[^p53-2] at ease he is filled with a sense of peace and in that peace his heart is stayed.

The state where the hindrances are abandoned but the mind has not yet become fully concentrated in the first jhāna seems to be the canonical paradigm for access concentration. Though the mental factors determinative of the jhāna are present in access concentration, they do not as yet possess sufficient strength to give this state the full qualification of the first jhāna. They are strong enough only to exclude the hindrances and hold them at bay. This preliminary state, as we said, is a necessary prelude to the attainment of jhāna, but does not itself possess a powerful enough degree of mental unification to actually place the mind in full absorption. With continued practice, however, the nascent jhāna factors will grow in strength until they gain sufficient force to issue in the first jhāna.

Thus, beginning from the ordinary distracted condition of the untrained mind, a yogin begins developing concentration. This initial practice arouses certain mental factors which counter the hindrances and unify the mind upon its object. The complete suppression of the hindrances marks the achievement of access concentration. The attainment of jhāna then lies close at hand. When, through further application, these factors can unify the mind to the degree of immersion in its object, the jhāna is actually attained.

## The Causal Arising of the Hindrances

The five hindrances, the Buddha teaches, are like all other phenomena causally conditioned, arising and subsiding in correlation with other things which serve as their supports. When these supports are present the hindrances spring up and grow, when the supports are removed they fade away and disappear. Since the hindrances thus depend on other factors for their origination and cessation, the suppression and elimination of the hindrances requires an understanding of these factors, what they are and how to overcome them.

As part of his program for the conquest of the hindrances, the Buddha has taken special care to provide an exact account of their genetic groundwork. This account proceeds at both the general and particular level, laying bare the causes for the hindrances as a group and for each individual member of this group. In the Aṅguttara Nikāya, the Buddha includes the five hindrances in a sequence of conditions nourishing and sustaining ignorance, itself the fundamental root of saṃsāra:

Ignorance, I declare, monks, has its nutriment. It is not without nutriment. And what is the nutriment of ignorance? ‘The five hindrances’ should be the reply. I declare, monks, that the five hindrances have their nutriment, are not without nutriment. And what is the nutriment of the five hindrances? ‘The three wrong ways of practice’ should be the reply. They too have their nutriment. What? ‘Nonrestraint of the sense faculties’ should be the reply. They too have their nutriment. What? ‘Lack of mindfulness and self-composure’ should be the reply. That, too, has its nutriment, I declare. What? ‘Lack of thorough work of mind’ [unwise consideration] should be the reply. And what is the nutriment of that? ‘Lack of faith’ should be the reply. What is the nutriment of that? ‘Not listening to true Dhamma’ I declare, monks. That not listening to true Dhamma has its nutriment, is not without nutriment. And what is the nutriment of not listening to true Dhamma? ‘Not[^p54-1] following after the very man’ should be the reply.

As this statement points out, the five hindrances while “nourishing” ignorance are nourished in turn by the three wrong ways of practice, non-restraint of the senses, lack of mindfulness and self-composure, unwise consideration, and so on. Through unwise consideration a man fails to control his mind. Lacking mindfulness he allows his senses to roam unchecked in their objective fields, seeking sensual gratification. Obsessed by sense stimuli, he then engages in the three wrong ways of practice – bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct – and these actions reinforce the hindrances, which then maintain the ignorance that holds him in bondage.

The Buddha often calls attention to the crucial role played by “unwise consideration” (ayoniso manasikāra) in the arising of unwholesome states. Unwise consideration is “inexpedient reflection, reflection on the wrong track” (anupāyamanasikāra). It is reflection which apprehends its object through the four “perversions” (vipallāsa), considering the impermanent as permanent, pain as pleasure, non-self as self, and the[^p55-1] foul as beautiful. This wrong reflection is particularly instrumental in causing the arising and growth of all the five hindrances:

In him who practices unmindful observation sensual desire, ill will, sloth and torpor, excitement and flurry [restless and worry], and doubt, if not already arisen, arise, and if already arisen, sensual desire, ill will, sloth and torpor, excitement and flurry [restlessness and worry], and doubt are conducive to[^p55-2] increasing, and growth thereof. (Wr. tr.).

But unwise consideration functions not only as a general cause for the hindrances as a group; it is a specific cause for each of the hindrances individually as well. As the general phenomenon of incorrect attention unwise consideration serves as the common ground for all the hindrances. Acts of incorrect attention, however, always take on

F. L. Woodward with an Introduction by Mrs. Rhys Davids. (Pali Text Society Translation Series nos. 22, 24, 25-27].5 vols. 1932-36; reprint, London: Luzac & Co., l936-79), 5:79 (hereafter cited as GS.).

particular forms which can be correlated with particular hindrances. Differences in the modes in which unwise consideration occurs are determined by the variations in its objects and associated factors. Depending on these variations, unwise consideration becomes a cause for each separate hindrance:

Just as this body, monks, is sustained by nutriment, stands in dependence on nutriment, and does not stand without nutriment, in the same way the five hindrances are sustained by nutriment, stand in dependence on nutriment, and do not stand without nutriment. 1. What, monks, is the nutriment for the arising of unarisen sensual desire, and for the growth and expansion of sensual desire that has already arisen? There is, monks, the beautiful appearance of things. Habitual unwise consideration of that is the nutriment for the arising of unarisen sensual desire, and for the growth and expansion of sensual desire that has already arisen. 2. And what, monks, is the nutriment for the arising of unarisen ill will, and for the growth and expansion of ill will that has already arisen? There is, monks, the repulsive appearance of things. Habitual unwise consideration of that is the nutriment for the arising of unarisen ill will… 3. And what, monks, is the nutriment for the arising of unarisen sloth and torpor…? There is, monks, discontent, drowsiness, langour, surfeit after meals, and sluggishness of mind. Habitual unwise consideration of them is the nutriment for the arising of unarisen sloth and torpor… 4. And what, monks, is the nutriment for the arising of unarisen restlessness and worry…? There is, monks, non-tranquility of mind. Habitual unwise consideration of that is the nutriment for the arising of unarisen restlessness and worry. 5. And what, monks, is the nutriment for the arising of unarisen doubt…? There are, monks, matters which are grounds for doubt. Habitual unwise con[^p56-1] sideration of them is the nutriment for the arising of unarisen doubt… (Wr. tr.).

Thus we see that the five hindrances arise and increase, in general, through engagement in the three wrong ways of practice, lack of sense control, lack of mindfulness, and unwise consideration. Specifically, sensual desire arises through unwise consideration of the attractive appearance of things, ill will through unwise consideration of the repulsive features of things, sloth and torpor through unwise consideration of states conducive to lethargy, restlessness and worry through unwise consideration of disturbing states, and doubt through unwise consideration of matters provocative of doubt.

## The Elimination of the Hindrances

Once the genetic basis for the rise and growth of the hindrances becomes clear, the way to counteract and eliminate them follows as a matter of course. Since the hindrances occur in dependence on specific causes and conditions, their control and conquest requires simply that their generative causes be removed. Though the actual achievement of such a stoppage may be difficult and require diligent effort, it is the fundamental optimism of Buddhism that the qualities needed to overcome the hindrances are not beyond man’s capacity for development, provided only that he is given the proper methodology. It is the purpose of the Buddha’s discipline to provide precisely that methodology which leads to the conquest of the hindrances and thereby of ignorance itself.

The final conquest of the hindrances is effected exclusively by the four supramundane paths. To reach the path the development of insight (vipassanā) is indispensable, since insight into the true characteristics of phenomena issues in the supramundane wisdom of the path. But in order for insight to arise, the hindrances have to be attenuated to a degree where they no longer disrupt the process of contemplation.

The canonical texts offer two basic approaches to the preliminary overcoming of the hindrances. One is the suppression of the hindrances by the development of serenity (samatha), either access concentration or jhāna; the other is their elimination in the course of developing insight. The former is described in the discourses of the Buddha expounding the stages of the “gradual training,” the latter in the discourses on the[^p57-1] practice of satipaṭṭhāna, “the foundations of mindfulness”.

Two different approaches are offered because of the differing mental dispositions of disciples. Disciples of a contemplative bent generally incline to first attain concentration by suppressing the hindrances through jhāna and then move on to the development of insight. These are called practitioners of the vehicle of serenity (samathayānika) who develop “insight preceded by serenity.” Other disciples, of an intellectual bent, are generally disposed to strive immediately for insight, leaving until later the task of deepening concentration. These are called practitioners of the vehicle of insight

(vipassanāyānika) who develop “serenity preceded by insight.” Both types must eventually cultivate insight by practising the foundations of mindfulness, since insightwisdom is needed to reach the supramundane path. They differ, not with respect to the inclusion of insight, but in the sequence they follow to develop insight. The practitioner of serenity attains jhāna then cultivates insight, and finally reaches the path. The practitioner of insight reaches the path directly by cultivating insight, without relying on a foundation of jhāna.

We will now consider in turn each of the two approaches to the overcoming of the hindrances, taking first the approach of the gradual training, in which the attainment of serenity is emphasized, and then the approach of the foundations of mindfulness, which emphasizes the direct development of insight. Finally we will briefly note the way the hindrances are eradicated by the four supramundane paths.

The Way of the Gradual Training We saw above that the hindrances are maintained by a series of conditions beginning with failure to follow after superior men and continuing on through not listening to the true Dhamma, lack of faith, unwise consideration, absence of mindfulness and selfpossession, non-restraint of the senses, and engagement in the three wrong ways of practice. The standard canonical presentation of the gradual training, as found for[^p58-1] example in the Sāmaññaphala Sutta, shows the way this originative pattern is reversed. The presentation begins with the appearance in the world of the Buddha and his teaching of the doctrine, which make available the opportunity to follow after superior men and to hear the true Dhamma. The gain of faith in the teaching leads to commitment to the training, which proceeds according to a graded step-by-step structure designed to lead the practitioner gradually to the goal of liberation.

The most elementary step along the path is the observance of moral discipline. The moral precepts, varying in range from the five precepts for the laity to the full code of Vinaya rules for monks, have the purpose of inculcating restraint of body and speech. Since the unwholesome mental states motivating bodily and verbal misconduct grow stronger when such actions are indulged in, to overcome the defilements it is necessary to begin by controlling their coarser expressions by way of physical and verbal activity. This control is exercised by acting in conformity with the rules of conduct. By careful observance of the moral code, the disciple can eliminate the bodily and verbal modes of misconduct which nourish the five hindrances, thereby weakening their outer impulsive force.

The mere observance of moral rules, however, is not sufficient to combat the hold of the defilements upon the interior processes of the mind. The defilements must be dealt with at their own level by being subjected to a thoroughgoing mental discipline. This training begins with the restraint of the senses (indriya sa.vara). Seeing a visible form with the eye, or cognizing any object with any sense faculty, the disciple does not seize upon its

1 general appearance or details, but controls, guards, and masters his sense faculties. Since apprehension of the general appearance and details of sensually attractive and repulsive objects can become a ground for attachment and aversion, the meditator has to avoid this entrancement with sense objects, confining his attention to the bare data without elaborating upon them through subjective commentary. Then, endowed with this self-restraint, the disciple develops mindfulness and discernment (satisampajañña)[^p59-2] in all his activities, movements, and modes of deportment. By examining everything he does with full awareness and clear comprehension, he can prevent these activities from becoming bases for the arising of the hindrances. To avoid attachment and aversion with respect to the physical supports of life, he is further enjoined to cultivate contentment 3 (santu((hi) with a bare minimum of robes, food, medicine, and shelter.

These preliminary trainings in morality, restraint of the senses, mindfulness and discernment, and contentment provide the necessary preparation for the cultivation of the higher consciousness through the practice of meditation. Once he has fulfilled these preliminaries the disciple is prepared to go into solitude to develop the jhānas, and it is here that he meets the hindrances in direct confrontation.

He, returning from alms-gathering after his meal, sits down cross-legged holding the back erect, having made mindfulness rise up in front of him. He, having got rid of covetousness for the world, lives with a mind devoid of coveting, he purifies the mind of coveting. By getting rid of the taint of ill will, he lives benevolent in mind; and compassionate for the welfare of all creatures and beings, he purifies the mind of the taint of ill will. By getting rid of sloth and torpor, he lives devoid of sloth and torpor; perceiving the light, mindful and clearly conscious, he purifies the mind of sloth and torpor. By getting rid of restlessness and worry, he lives calmly, the mind subjectively tranquillised, he purifies the mind of restlessness and worry. By getting rid of doubt, he lives doubt-crossed; unperplexed as to the states that are skilled, he[^p59-4] purifies his mind of doubt.

The elimination of the hindrances requires, first of all, that the meditator honestly appraises his inner condition by way of introspective self-scrutiny: “If a monk while considering knows thus: ‘the five hindrances have not been got rid of by me,’ he should

1 make an effort to get rid of them.” When sensuality, ill will, and the other hindrances[^p60-2] are present, “he knows with understanding that they are present.” Then, when their presence has been detected, what is required is knowledge of their appropriate antidotes. Since all the hindrances arise, as we saw, through unwise consideration, it follows that the most efficient general way to overcome them is to alter the manner in which things are attended to. This means, in effect, to replace unwise consideration with wise consideration (yonisomanasikāra). Wise consideration is consideration which accords with the true nature of things; it is “expedient reflection, reflection going on the right track,… reflection that considers the facts of impermanence, suffering, soullessness, and[^p60-3] impurity according to reality.” By correcting the subtle perceptual and cognitive distortions which supply the hindrances with food for growth, the constant cultivation of wise consideration removes the hindrances and holds them at bay: “But, monks, in him who gives systematic attention, sensual desire (… doubt) which has not arisen does not[^p60-4] arise, and if it has arisen it is abandoned.”

Just as each hindrance has its individual nutriment in the particular kind of unwise consideration corresponding to its own unique operative mode, so each hindrance has its “non-nutriment” (anāhāra), the cause for its elimination, in the appropriate kind of wise consideration.

And what, monks, is no food for the arising of sensual lust not yet arisen, or for the more-becoming and growth thereof, if already arisen? There is, monks, the repulsive feature of things. Systematic attention thereto, if made much of, is no food for the arising of sensual lust, if not yet arisen, or for its[^p60-5] more-becoming and growth if already arisen.

Similarly, wise consideration of the mental liberation of loving kindness (mettācetovimutti) counteracts ill will; wise consideration of the elements of effort (ārambhadhātu), exertion (nikkamadhātu), and striving (parakkamadhātu) counteracts sloth and torpor; wise consideration of tranquility (cetaso vūpasama) counteracts restlessness and worry; and wise consideration of wholesome and unwholesome states 6 (kusalākusaladhammā) counteracts doubt.

In the commentaries the Buddha’s miscellaneous suggestions on the elimination of the hindrances are organized into a systematic exposition of six measures conducive to the vanquishing of each hindrance. Sensual desire is to be abandoned by:

Taking up the sensuously inauspicious subject of meditation; application for the development of the jhāna on the sensuously inauspicious subject of meditation; the guarded state of the controlling faculties of sense; moderation in food; the sympathy and support of good men in the endeavour; stimulating[^p61-1] talk that helps the accomplishment of the object in view.

Ill will or anger is overcome by the following six measures:

Taking up the practice of the love subject of meditation; applying oneself to the development of jhāna on the thought of love; reflection on one’s action as one’s own property; abundance of wise consideration; sympathetic and helpful companionship of the good; and stimulating talk that assists the development[^p61-2] of the thought of love and the overthrow of anger.

The six things leading to the conquest of sloth and torpor are:

The seeing of the reason of sloth and torpor in the fact of eating too much, or gluttony; the changing of the postures completely; reflection on the perception of light; staying in the open; sympathetic and helpful companionship of the[^p61-3] good; and stimulating talk that assists in dispelling sloth and torpor.

The six things conducive to eliminating restlessness and worry are:

Knowledge; questioning; understanding of disciplinary rules; association with those more experienced and older than oneself in the practice of things like virtue; sympathetic and helpful companionship; and stimulating talk that helps[^p61-4] the rejection of mental agitation and worry.

And the following six measures lead to the transcendence of doubt:

The state of being learned in the Buddha’s teaching; of inquiring about the Buddha, the Teaching, and the Order of Real Saints; of understanding thoroughly the nature of the Discipline; of being decided about the truth of the Buddha, the Teaching, and the Order of the Real Saints; sympathetic and[^p61-5] helpful companionship; and stimulating talk that helps to dispel doubt.

The suppression of hindrances effected by these techniques is necessary not only as a preliminary for entering upon jhāna, but also to ensure the ability to extend the attainment and make it last long. Even if a meditator can overcome the hindrances by force of sheer concentration, if he has not weakened their grip on the subliminal layers of the mind by right reflection and mental application, they will tend to break through the absorption and dispel his concentration. Therefore his enjoyment of jhāna will be short and superficial.

When a bhikkhu enters upon a jhāna without (first) completely suppressing lust by reviewing the dangers in sense desires, etc., and without (first) completely tranquillising bodily irritability by tranquillising the body, and without (first) completely removing stiffness and torpor by bringing to mind the elements of initiative, etc., and without (first) completely abolishing agitation and worry by bringing to mind the sign of serenity, etc., and without (first) completely purifying his mind of other states that obstruct concentration, then that bhikkhu soon comes out of that jhāna again, like a bee that has gone into an unpurified hive, like a king who has gone into an[^p62-1] unclean park.

The Way of Mindfulness[^p62-2] In the Satipa::hāna Sutta, the “Discourse on the Foundations of Mindfulness,” the Buddha proposes a different technique for overcoming the hindrances, one which utilizes direct, mindful observation of the hindrances themselves as a method for loosening their hold upon the mind. This approach presupposes the same basic set of preliminaries observed in following the gradual training: moral discipline, restraint of the senses, mindfulness and discernment, and contentment. However, instead of employing a variety of techniques to counteract the hindrances with the aim of reaching jhāna, the method of mindfulness proceeds directly to the contemplation of mental and bodily phenomena with the aim of arousing insight. The diverse phenomena of body and mind are classified into four “foundations of mindfulness”: the body (kāya), feelings (vedanā), states of mind (citta), and mental objects (dhamma). The confrontation with the hindrances enters into the last set, the contemplation of mental objects (dhammānupassanā), where it comes as the first exercise in this group:

Here, O bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives contemplating the mental objects in the mental objects of the five hindrances.

How, O bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu live contemplating mental objects in the mental objects of the five hindrances?

Here, O bhikkhus, when sensuality is present, a bhikkhu with understanding knows: ‘I have sensuality,’ or when sensuality is not present he with understanding knows: ‘I have no sensuality’. He understands how the arising of the non-arisen sensuality comes to be; he understands how the abandoning of the arisen sensuality comes to be; and he understands how the non-arising in the future of the abandoned sensuality comes to be… anger is present… sloth and torpor are present… agitation and worry are present… When doubt is present, he with understanding knows: ‘I have doubt’. He understands how the arising of non-arisen doubt comes to be; he understands how the abandoning of the arisen doubt comes to be; and he understands how the[^p63-1] non-arising in the future of the abandoned doubt comes to be.

Since it is impossible for a meditator to completely avoid situations tending to provoke the hindrances into activity, he requires a technique which enables him to deal with them effectively at the causal level – to prevent them from arising if possible, or to eliminate them swiftly and surely if they should arise. Mindful observation provides him with just such a technique. Through bare attention to the hindrances, he is able to gain clear comprehension of their individual nature and to discern their causes and conditions. Contemplation of the hindrances is a means both to calm and insight. By directly facing each hindrance that presents itself, the meditator is able to divest it of the destructive power it can freely exercise when it escapes undetected. Repeated introspective self-examination, performed with complete sincerity, gives him the self-knowledge required to transform and purify the direction of his mental life. In this way mindfulness of the hindrances becomes a means to the development of concentrated calm.

The same contemplation, when directed towards the hindrances as bare instances of phenomena exhibiting the universal features of phenomena, becomes a means for gaining insight (vipassanā). By observing the rise and fall of the mental processes associated with the hindrances, the meditator gains insight into the fact of impermanence (anicca). By attending to their restless nature and disturbing effects, he sees the truth of suffering (dukkha). And by viewing the hindrances as mere impersonal events, devoid of any substance or ego-oriented reference point, he comes to an appreciation of the truth of selflessness (anattā). If these insights are pursued and developed to the deeper levels they imply, they could even issue in the attainment of the supramundane path. In this way the method of mindfulness is able to transform even obstacles to meditation into integral parts of the meditative process.

In the practice of insight meditation no deliberate effort is made to develop concentration. Since the practitioner does not confine his attention to a single object, the arising of concentration at the access or absorption level is impossible. Insight meditation involves the contemplation of the constantly changing flow of phenomena. its object is shifting from moment to moment, as one phenomenon passes away to be replaced by the next. Thus the stability of a single focal point essential to attaining jhāna is absent.

Nevertheless, the practice of insight does produce a spontaneous kind of concentration existing concurrently with itself. This kind of mental unification, called “momentary concentration” (kha5ika samādhi) comes into being through the fixity with which the mind attends to the changing phenomena. As the mind examines undistractedly the phenomenal process, the successive moments of contemplation acquire a concentrative power equal to the task of suppressing the hindrances. Though it does not possess the force needed to attain jhāna, this momentary concentration arisen through insight-practice is sufficiently strong to prevent the hindrances from disturbing contemplation and to allow the wisdom of insight to arise. Thus even without developing jhāna the practitioner of bare insight can build up concentration moment by moment, giving him enough mental unification to serve as a basis for insight and attainment of the path.

In sum, the practitioner of serenity first suppresses the hindrances by access concentration or jhāna, then begins to develop insight. The practitioner of bare insight begins by contemplating the four foundations of mindfulness. He incidentally develops momentary concentration which eliminates the hindrances, then he arouses insight.

The Eradication of the Hindrances In the jhāna the hindrances are abandoned only by way of suppression. Though inactive, they still remain as dormancies in the mental continuum, capable of cropping up again if sufficiently stimulated. The actual eradication of the hindrances requires the wisdom of the supramundane paths, which abandons the hindrances by cutting them off at the root. This abandonment by cutting off (samucchedappahāna) is accomplished with respect to different hindrances by different paths in the four stages of supramundane development. According to the Visuddhimagga, the first path, the path of stream-entry (sotāpattimagga), cuts off the hindrance of doubt. The second, the path of the once-returner (sakadāgāmi magga), weakens all the hindrances but cuts off none. The third, the path of the non-returner (anāgāmi magga), cuts off the hindrances of sensual desire, ill will, and worry. And the fourth, the path of arahatship (arahatta magga), cuts[^p64-1] off the remainder – sloth and torpor and restlessness. Thus it is only the arahat who has completely overcome all the hindrances. In the arahat, the Buddha explains, “these five hindrances are abandoned, cut down at the root, made like a palmtree stump, made[^p64-2] something that has ceased to be, so as not to grow again in future time.”

## The Benefits of Abandoning the Hindrances

From the perspective of Pāli Buddhism, the reduction and elimination of the five hindrances is essential not only to the attainment of jhāna, but to all aspects of man’s moral and spiritual development. The hindrances represent an entire spectrum of defiled mental states. Their presence implies the presence as well of the unwholesome roots, the 1 floods, bonds, cankers, clinging, ties and fetters. They are like a debt, a disease,[^p65-2] imprisonment, slavery, and a desert road. When they overpower the mind a man can[^p65-3] perceive neither his own good, the good of others, or the good of both. Under their[^p65-4] influence he will do what he should not do and neglect what he ought to do. They[^p65-5] corrupt the mind and weaken wisdom. They cause spiritual blindness and ignorance,[^p65-6] destroy wisdom, lead to vexation, and distract from nibbāna. Just as gold impaired by five impurities – iron, copper, tin, lead, and silver – is not pliant and wieldy, lacks radiance, is brittle, and cannot be wrought well, so the mind, corrupted by the five hindrances, “is not pliant and wieldy, lacks radiant lucidity and firmness and cannot[^p65-7] concentrate well upon the eradication of the taints.” Therefore the Buddha can say of them: “Rightly speaking a person, bhikkhus, would call the five hindrances ‘a heap of[^p65-8] demerits’, for indeed one entire mass of demerit are the five hindrances.”

The abandonment of the hindrances marks the beginning of freedom: “But when these five hindrances have been put away within him, he looks upon himself as freed from[^p65-9] debt, rid of diseases, out of jail, a free man, and secure.” With the hindrances abandoned, there is no limit to the possibilities for spiritual growth. Just as gold free

1. PP., p. 147. Vism., p. 87.

from the five impurities will be pliant and supple, radiant and firm, and can be wrought well, so, the Buddha says:

If the mind is freed of these five impurities, it will be pliant and supple, will have radiant lucidity and firmness, and will concentrate well upon the eradication of the taints. To whatever state realizable by the higher mental faculties one may direct the mind, one will, in each case, acquire the capacity[^p66-1] of realization, if the (other) conditions are fulfilled.

The abandonment of the five hindrances is the precondition, not only for the attainment of jhāna, but for all other higher achievements. It is by the abandoning of the hindrances[^p66-2] that the four Brahmavihāras become possible, as the meditator must purge his mind of the hindrances prior to suffusing the world with the sublime emotions of loving[^p66-3] kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity. Before teaching a receptive disciple the Four Noble Truths, the Buddha always made sure that his mind was “ready,[^p66-4] malleable, devoid of the hindrances” (vinīvara5acitta) in order to ensure his ability to grasp this profound doctrine, inaccessible to a defiled mind. Freedom from the hindrances is thus a requisite for the arising of the “eye of Dhamma,” the direct insight into the truth which leads to the first level of liberation, the stage of stream-entry (sotāpatti). Those who have entered the stream and are training to attain “supreme[^p66-5] security from bondage” dwell having abandoned the five hindrances. It is when his mind has become “composed, quite purified, quite clarified, without blemish, without[^p66-6] defilement, grown soft and workable, fixed, immovable,” that the disciple can direct it to attain the triple knowledge (tevijjā) – the recollection of former lives, the knowledge of the passing away and reappearance of beings, and the knowledge of the destruction of[^p66-7] the cankers. All who reach liberation first abandon the hindrances:

All those who are emancipated from the world, who were emancipated or will be emancipated, are emancipated by abandoning the five hindrances which are corruptions of the mind and weakening of wisdom, establishing their minds

well in the four foundations of mindfulness; and developing correctly the[^p67-1] seven factors of enlightenment. (Wr. tr.).

Even the perfectly enlightened Buddhas of the past, present, and future awaken to[^p67-2] supreme, perfect enlightenment by having first abandoned the five hindrances. Thus the Buddha can prescribe his teaching for the destruction of these impediments: “It is for the full comprehension, entire understanding, destruction, elimination of these five[^p67-3] hindrances that the Noble Eightfold Path should be cultivated.

[^p37-1]: I. B. Horner, trans. and ed., The Collection of the Middle Length Sayings (Majjhima-Nikāya. [Vol. 1: The First Fifty Discourses (mūlapa55āsa); vol. 2: The Middle Fifty Discourses (majjhimapa55āsa); vol. 3: The Final Fifty Discourses (uparipa55āsa)]. (Pali Text Society [Translation Series nos. 29-31].3 vols. 1954-59; Reprint. London: Luzac & Co., 1970). 1:354-55 (hereafter cited as MLS.). “Pa:hamaJ kho āvuso jhānaJ pañcaKgavippahīnaJ pañcaKgasamannāgataJ: Idh’āvuso paṭhamaJ jhānaJ samāpannassa bhikkhuno kāmacchando pahīno hoti, byāpādo pahīno hoti, thīnamiddhaJ pahīnaJ hoti, uddhacakukkuccaJ pahīnaJ hoti, vicikicchā pahīnā hoti. Vitakko ca vattati, vicāro ca pīti ca sukhaJ ca cittekaggatā ca. Pa:hamaJ kho āvuso jhānaJ evaJ pañcaKgavippahīnaJ pañcaKgasamannāgataJ’ti.” MN. 1:294-95.
[^p38-1]: “Vivicc’eva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaJ savicāraJ vivekajaJ pi:isukhaJ paṭhamaJ jhānaJ upasampajja viharati.” MN. 1:89. Vibh., p. 245.
[^p38-2]: Mahā Niddesapāli, [Pāli Text in Burmese script], (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1960), pp. 1-2 (hereafter cited as Nd.). Vibh., p. 256. PP., l46. Vism., p. 113.
[^p39-1]: PP., p. 145. “Andhakāre sati padīpobhāso viya, tesaJ pariccāgeneva c’assa adhigamo hoti, orimatīrapariccāgena parimatīrasseva.” Vism., p. 113.
[^p39-2]: PP., pp. 145-46. Vism., pp. 83-84.
[^p39-3]: PP., p. 147. Vism., p. 114.
[^p39-4]: “CittaJ nīvarenti pariyonandhantī ti nīvararanā.” Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā [Pāli Text in Burmese script] (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1960), p.91 (hereafter cited as Dhs.A.).
[^p39-5]: C. A. F. Rhys Davids, and F. L. Woodward, trans. The Book of the Kindred Sayings (Saṃyutta-Nikāya) or Grouped Suttas. [Pt. 1: Kindred Sayings with verses (Sagatha-Vagga), translated by Mrs. Rhys Davids assisted by Sūriyagoda SumaKgala Thera; pt. 2: The Nidāna Book (Nidāna-Vagga), translated by Mrs. Rhys Davids assisted by F. L. Woodward; pt. 3: translated by F. L. Woodward and edited by Mrs. Rhys Davids; pt. 4: translated by F. L. Woodward with an Introduction by Mrs. Rhys Davids; pt. 5. (Mahā-Vagga), translated by F. L. Woodward with an Introduction by Mrs. Rhys Davids. (Pali Text Society Translation Series, vols. 7, 10, 13-15].5 vols. 1927-30; reprint. London: Luzac & Co., 1956-71), 5:79 (hereafter cited as KS.). “ĀvaraLā nīvaraLā cetaso upakkilesā paññāya dubbalīkaraLā.” SN. 5:94.
[^p40-1]: KS. 5:91. “Pañcime bhikkhave nīvaraLā andhakaraLā acakkhukaraLā aññāLakaraLā paññānirodhikā vighātapakkhiyā anibbānasaJvattanikā.” SN. 5:97.
[^p40-2]: DN. 1:71-73.
[^p40-3]: SN. 5:121-24.
[^p40-4]: “Yasmim samaye kāmarāgapariyu::hitena cetasā viharati kāmarāgaparetena. Uppannassa ca kāmarāgassa nissaraLaJ yathābhūtaJ nappajānāti, attatthaJ pi tasmiJ samaye yathābhūtaJ na jānāti na passati. ParatthaJ pi, ubhayatthaJ pi tasmiJ samaye yathābhūtaJ na jānāti na passati.” SN. 5:121-22.
[^p40-5]: PP., p. 152. Vism., p. 118.
[^p41-1]: PP., p. 147. Vism., p. 114.
[^p41-2]: PP., p. 152. Vism., p. 118.
[^p41-3]: PP., p. 152. “Kāmacchandena hi nānāvisayapalobhitaJ cittaJ na ekattārammaLe samādhiyati; kāmacchandābhibhūtaJ vataJ na kāmadhātuppahānāya pa:ipadaJ pa:ipajjati; byāpādena c’ārammaLe pa:ihaññamānaJ na nirantaraJ pavattati; thīnamiddhābhibhūtaJ akammaññaJ hoti; uddhaccakukkuccaparetaJ avūpasantaJ eva hutvā paribbhamati; vicikicchāya upahataJ jhānādhigama sādhikaJ pa:ipadaJ narohati. Iti visesena jhānantarāyakarattā etān’eva pahānaKgānī ti vuttāni.” Vism., p. 118.
[^p42-1]: PP., p. 147. “VibhaKge upari jhānaKgānaJ paccanika-pa:ipakkha-bhāvadassanato nīvaraLā’eva vuttāni. NīvaraLāni hi jhānaKgapaccani-kāni; tesaJ jhānaKgān’eva pa:ipakkhāni viddhaJsakāni vighātakānī ti vuttaJ hoti.” Vism., p. 114.
[^p42-2]: PP., p. 147. “Samādhi kāmacchandassa pa:ipakkho, pīti byāpādassa, vitakko thīnamiddhassa, sukhaJ uddhaccakukkuccassa, vicāro vicikicchāya ti [] Pe:ake vuttā.” Vism., p. 114. N.B. The Path of Purification’s “happiness” is our “rapture” (pīti), and The Path of Purification’s “bliss” is our “happiness” (sukha). The other differences in translation are more obvious, and can be checked in Appendix 3. nīvaraLaJ. KāmacchandanīvaraLaJ ti iti hidaJ uddesaJ āgacchati, tadaminā petaJ pariyāyena dvayaJ hoti. Yad api bhikkhave ajjhattaJ byāpādo tad api nīvaraLaJ. Yad api bahiddhā byāpādo tad api nīvaraLaJ. ByāpādanīvaranaJ ti iti hidaJ uddesaJ āgacchati. Tad aminā petaJ pariyāyena dvayaJ hoti. Yad api bhikkhave thīnaJ tad api nīvaraLaJ. Yad api middhaJ tad api nīvaraLaJ. ThīnamiddhanīvaraLaJ ti iti hidaJ uddesaJ āgacchati. Tad aminā petaJ pariyāyena dvayaJ hoti. Yad api bhikkhave uddhaccaJ tad api nīvaraLaJ. Yad api kukkuccaJ tad api nīvaraLaJ. Uddhacca kukkucca nīvaraLanti iti hidaJ uddesaJ āgacchati. Tad aminā petaJ pariyāyena dvayaJ hoti. Yad api bhikkhave ajjhattaJ dhammesu vicikicchā tad api nīvaraLaJ. Yad api bahiddhā dhammesu vicikicchā tad api nīvaraLaJ. VicikicchānīvaraLaJ ti iti hidaJ uddesaJ āgacchati. Tad aminā petaJ pariyāyena dvayaJ hoti. AyaJ kho bhikkhave pariyāyo yaJ pariyāyaJ āgamma pañca nīvaraLā dasa honti.” SN. 5:110.
[^p43-2]: “ThīnaJ citta gelaññaJ, middhaJ cetasikagelaññaJ.” Buddhaghosa, (Dīgha Nikāya Aṭṭhakathā (Suma/galavilāsinī)]. [Vol. 1:] Sīlakkhandhavaggaṭṭhakathā; [vol. 2:] Mahāvaggaṭṭhakathā; [vol. 3:] Pāthikavaggaṭṭhakathā. [Pāli Text in Burmese script].3 vols. (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1968), 1:189 (hereafter cited as DN.A.).
[^p43-3]: PP., p. 147. Vism., p. 114.
[^p44-1]: Dhs.A., p. 402.
[^p44-2]: “I::hā kantā manāpā piyarūpā kāmupasaJhitā rajanīyā.” MN. 1:85.
[^p44-3]: Caroline A. F. Rhys Davids, trans. A Buddhist Manual of Psychological Ethics of the Fourth Century B. C. Being a translation, Now made for the First Time from the Original Pali of the First Book in the Abhidhamma Pitaka entitled Dhamma-Sa/ga5i (Compendium of States of Phenomena) with Introductory Essay and Notes, Oriental Translation Fund, New Series, vol. 12, (London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1900), pp. 292-93 (hereafter cited as Psy.Ethics). “Yo kāmesu kāmacchando, kāmarāgo, kāmanandi, kāma taLhā, kāmasineho, kāma pariXāho, kāma mucchā, kāmajjhosanā, idaJ vuccati kāmacchandanivaraLaJ.” Dhs., p. 232.
[^p44-4]: PP., pp. 529-30. “Lobho ārammaLagahaLalakkhaLo, makka:ālepo viya; abhisaKgaraso, ta::akapāle khittamaKsapesi viya; apariccāgapaccupa::hāno, telañjanarāgo viya; saKyojanīyadhammesu assādadassanapada::hāno; taLhānadībhāvena vaYYhamāno, sīghasotā nadī iva mahāsamuddaJ, apāyaJ eva gahetvā gacchattī ti da::habbo.” Vism., p. 396.
[^p44-5]: Dhs.A., p. 402.
[^p45-1]: MLS. 2:27. “Etadeva kho pana saJyojanaJ etaJ nīvaraLaJ yadidaJ pāLātipāto… nindāroso… kodhūpāyāso…” MN. 1:361-64.
[^p45-2]: Psy. Ethics, pp. 282-83. “Tattha katamaJ byāpādanīvaraLaJ? ‘AnatthaJ me akarī’ti āghāto jāyati. ‘AnatthaJ me caratī’ti āghāto jāyati. ‘AnatthaJ me carissatī’ti āghāto jāyati. ‘Piyassa me manāpassa anatthaJ acarī’ti…, anatthaJ caratī…, anatthaJ carissatī’ ti āgāto jāyati. ‘Appiyassa me amanāpassa atthaJ acari…, atthaJ carati…, atthaJ carissati’ti āghāto jāyati. A::hāne vā pana āghāto jāyati. Yo evarūpo cittassa āghāto pa:ighāto pa:ighaJ pa:ivirodho, kopo, pakopo. saJpakopo, doso, padoso, sampadoso, cittassa byāpatti, manopadoso, kodho, kujjanā, kujjitattaJ, doso, dussanā, dussitattaJ, byāpatti, byāpajjanā, byāpajjitattaJ, virodho, pa:ivirodho, caLdikkaJ, asuropo, anattamanatā cittassa-idaJ vuccati byāpādanīvaraLaJ.” Dhs., p. 232.
[^p45-3]: PP., p. 532. “So caLYikkalakkhaLo paha:āsiviso viya, visappanaraso visanipāto viya, attano nissaya- dahanaraso vā dāvaggi viya, dusanapaccupa::hāno laddhokāso viya sapatto, āghātavatthupada::hāno.” Vism., p. 398.
[^p46-1]: Psy. Ethics pp. 311-12. “Tattha katamaJ thīnamiddhanīvaraLaJ? Atthi thīnaJ, atthi middhaJ. Tattha katamaJ thīnaJ? Yā cittassa akallatā, akammaññatā, oliyanā, sallīyanā, līnaJ, līyanā, līyitattaJ, thīnaJ, thiyitā, thīyitattaJ cittassa idaJ vuccati thīnaJ. Tattha katamaJ middhaJ? Yā kāyassa asallatā, akammaññatā, ānāho, pariyonāho, antosamorodho, middhaJ, soppaJ, pacalāyikā, soppaJ, supanā, supitattaJ, idaJ vuccati middhaJ. Iti idaJ ca thīnaJ, idaJ ca middhaJ. IdaJ vuccati thīnamiddha- nīvaraLaJ.”
[^p46-2]: Buddhaghosa, The Expositor (Atthāsilinī), Buddhagosa’s Commentary on the Dhammasangani, the First Book of the Abhidhamma Piṭaka. Translated by Pe Maung Tin. Revised and edited by C. A. Rhys Davids. Pali Text Society Translation Series, nos. 8, 9.2 vols. (London: Luzac & Co., for the Pali Text Society, 1920-58), 2:485 (hereafter cited as Expositor. “Kāyassāti khandhattaya saKkhātassa nāmakāya- ssa.” Dhs.A., p. 409.
[^p46-3]: “ThīnaJ cittagelaññaJ.” DN.A. 1:189. “MiddhaJ cetasikagelaññaJ; middhaJ khandhattaya gelaññaJ.” Ibid., 3:210.
[^p47-1]: PP., p. 530. “Tattha thinaJ anussāhalakkhaLaJ, viriyavinodanarasaJ, saJsīdanapaccupa::hānaJ; middhaJ akammaññatalakkhaLaJ, onahanarasaJ, līnatāpaccupa::hānaJ, pacalāyikā-niddāpaccu- pa::hānaJ vā; ubhayaJ pi arativijambhikādīsu ayoniso manasikārapada::hānaJ.” Vism., p. 397.
[^p47-2]: See above, p. 64.
[^p47-3]: Psy. Ethics, p. 312-13. “Tattha katamaJ uddhaccakukkucca nīvaraLaJ? Tattha katamaJ uddhaccaJ? YaJ cittassa uddhaccaJ avupasamo cetaso vikkhepo bhantattaJ cittassa. IdaJ vuccati uddhaccaJ. Tattha katamam kukkuccaJ? Akappiye kappiya saññitā, kappiye akappiya saññitā, avajje vajja saññitā; vajje avajja saññitā; yaJ evarupaJ kukkuccaJ kukkuccāyanā, cetaso vippa:isāro, manovilekho, idaJ vuccati kukkuccaJ. Iti idaJ ca uddhaccaJ idaJ ca kukkuccaJ idaJ vuccati uddhaccakukkuccanīvara- LaJ.” Dhs., p. 233.
[^p48-1]: PP., p. 530. “TaJ avūpasamalakkhaLaJ, vàtābhighātacalajalaJ viya; anava::hānarasaJ. Vātābhighātacaladhajapatākāviya; bhantattapaccupa::hānaJ, pāsāLābhighātasamuddhatabhasmaJ viya; cetaso avūpasame ayoniso manasikārapada::hānaJ; cittavikkhepo, ti da::habbaJ.” Vism., p. 397.
[^p48-2]: PP., p. 532. “TaJ pacchānutāpalakkhaLaJ, katākatānusocanarasaJ. Vippa:isārapaccupa::hānaJ, katākatapada::hānaJ, dāsabyaJ iva da::habbaJ.” Vism., p. 398:
[^p48-3]: MN. 1:101.
[^p48-4]: 1bid., pp. 8, 260.
[^p48-5]: Psy. Ethics. p. 260. “Tattha katamaJ vicikicchānīvaraLaJ? Satthari kaKkhati vicikicchati; dhamme kaKkhati vicikicchati; sanghe kaKkhati vicikicchati; sikkhāya kaKkhati vicikicchati; pubbante kaKkhati vicikicchati; aparante kaKkhati vicikicchati; pubbantāparante kaKkhati vicikicchati; idappaccayatā pa:iccāsamuppannesu dhammesu kaKkhati vicikicchati: sā evarūpā kaKkhā kaKkhāyanā kaKkhāyitattaJ, vimati, vicikicchā, dveXhakaJ, dvedhāpatho, saJsayo, anekamsaggāho, āsappanā, parisappanā, apariyodahanā, thambhitatthaJ, cittassa mano vilekho, idaJ vuccati vicikicchānīvaraLaJ.” Dhs., pp. 233-34.
[^p49-1]: Dhs.A., pp. 388-89.
[^p49-2]: PP., p. 533. Vism., p. 398.
[^p49-3]: See p. 56.
[^p49-4]: Vism., p. 113.
[^p49-5]: MLS. 1:135. MN. 1:104.
[^p50-1]: “Pañca pahānāni: vikkhambhanappahānaJ, tadaKgappahānaJ, samucchedappahānaJ, pa:ippassaddhi- ppahānaJ, nissaraLappahanaJ.” Pa(isambhidamaggapāli [Pāli Text in Burmese script], (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1962), p.26 (hereafter cited as Pts.).
[^p50-2]: “Vikkhambhanappahānā ca nīvaraLānaJ paṭhamaJ jhānaJ bhāvayato, tadaKgappahānā ca di::higatānaJ nibbedhabhāgiyaJ samādhi bhāvayato, samucchedappahānañ ca lokuttaraJ khayagāmimaggaJ bhāvayato, pa:ippassaddhippahānañca phalakkhaLe, nissaranappahānañca nirodho nibbānaJ.” Ibid., pp. 26-27.
[^p50-3]: PP., p. 812. “Tena tena lokiyasamādhinā nīvaraLādīnaJ paccanikadhammānaJ vikkhambhanaJ, idaJ vitkkhambhanappahānaJ nāma.” Vism., p. 596.
[^p50-4]: PP., p. 812. Vism., p. 596.
[^p50-5]: PP., p. 813. Vism., pp. 596-97.
[^p51-1]: Ibid.
[^p51-2]: Dhammapāla, [Visuddhimagga Mahā Tīkā] Paramatthamañjūsā Nāma Visuddhimagga Mahā(īkā. [Pāli Text in Burmese script].2 vols. (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1960), 2:208-209 (hereafter cited as Vism.T.).
[^p51-3]: PP., p. 816. “YaJ pana, asanivicakkhābhihatassa rukkhassa viya ariyamaggañāLena saJyojanādīnaJ dhammānaJ yathā na puna pavattanti evaJ pahānaJ, idaJ samucchedappahānaJ nāma.” Vism., p. 598.
[^p51-4]: “YaJ pana phalakkhaLe pa:ippassaddhattaJ kilesānaJ etaJ pa:ippassaddhippahānaJ nāma.” Buddhaghosa, [Majjhima Nikāya Aṭṭhakathā (Papañcasūdanī)], [Vol. 1-2] Mūlapa55āsaṭṭhakathā; [vol. 3:] Majjhimapa55āsaṭṭhakathā; [vol. 4:] Uparipa55āsaṭṭhakathā. [Pāli Text in Burmese script].4 vols. (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1957), 1:24-25 (hereafter cited as MN.A.).
[^p51-5]: “YaJ sabbasaKkhatanissa:attā pahīnā sabbasankhataJ nibbānaJ etaJ nissaraLapahānaJ nāma.” Ibid., 25.
[^p52-1]: PP., p. 130. Vism., p. 101-102.
[^p52-2]: PP., p. 147. “NīvaranāLi hi jhānaKgapaccanikāni; tesaJ jhānaKgāneva pa:ipakkhāni viddhaKsakāni vighātakāni ti vuttaJ hoti. Tathā hi, ‘samādhi kāmacchandassa pa:ipakkho, pīti byāpādassa, vitakko thīnamiddhassa, sukhaJ uddhaccakukkuccassa, vicāro vicikicchāyā’ti [] Pe:ake vuttaJ.” Vism., p. 114.
[^p52-3]: PP., p. 130. Vism., p. 102.
[^p52-4]: PP., p. 131. “Uppannakālato ca pan’assa pa::hāya nīvaraLāni vikkhambhitāni eva honti, kilesā sannisinnā vā, upacārasamādhinā cittaJ samāhitaJ evā ti.” Vism., p. 102.
[^p53-1]: PP., p. 196. “Tassa pa:ibhāganimittapa:ilābhasamakālaJ eva, bahiddhā kāmānaJ amanasikārā vikkhambhanavasena kāmacchando pahīyati; anunayappahānen’eva’assa lohitappahānena pubbo viya byāpādo pi pahīyati; tathā āraddhaviriyatāya thīnamiddhaJ avippa:isārakarasantadhammānuyogavasena uddhaccakukkuccaJ, adhigatavisesassa paccakkhatāya pa:ipattidesake Satthari pa:ipattiyaJ pa:ipattiphale ca vicikicchā’ti pañca nivaraLāni pahīyanti.” Vism., p. 155.
[^p53-2]: T. W. Rhys Davids and C. A. F. Rhys Davids, trans. Dialogues of the Buddha (Dīgha Nikāya). [Vol. 1: translated by T. W. Rhys Davids; vols. 2-3: translated by T. W. Rhys Davids and C. A. F. Rhys Davids. (Sacred Books of the Buddhists, vols. 2-4].3 vols. 1889-1921; reprint, London: Luzac & Co., 1956-77), 1;84 (hereafter cited as Dial.). “Seyyathā pi mahā rāja ānanyaJ yathā ārogyaJ yathā bandhanā mokkhaJ yathā bhujissaJ yathā khemanta bhūmiJ, evaJ eva kho mahā-rāja bhikkhu ime pañca nīvaraLe pahīne attani samanupassati. Tassa ime pañca nīvaraLe pahīne attani samanupassato pāmujjaJ jāyati, pamuditassa pīti jāyati, pīti- manassa kāyo passambhati, passaddha kāyo sukhaJ vedeti, sukhino cittaJ samādhiyati.” DN. 1:72.
[^p54-1]: F. L. Woodward and E. M. Hare, trans. The Book of the Gradual Sayings (Aṅguttara-Nikāya) Or More-Numbered Suttas. [Vol. 1: (Ones, Twos, Threes), translated by F. L. Woodward with an Introduction by Mrs. Rhys Davids; vol. 2: (The Book of the Fours), translated by F. L. Woodward with an Introduction by Mrs. Rhys Davids; vol. 3: (The Books of the Fives and Sixes), translated by E. M. Hare with an Introduction by Mrs. Rhys Davids; vol. 4: (The Books of the Sevens, Eights and Nines), translated by E. M. Hare with an Introduction by Mrs. Rhys Davids; vol. 5: (The Book of the Tens and Elevens), translated by “Avijjamp’āhaJ bhikkave sāhāraJ vadāmi. No anāhāraJ. Ko cāhāro avijjā? Pañca nīvaraLāti’ssa vacanīyaJ. Pañcap’āhaJ bhikkhave nīvaraLe sāhāre vadāmi. No anāhāre. Ko cāhāro pañcannaJ nīvaraLānaJ? TīLi duccaritānīti’ssa vacanīyaJ. TīLi p’āhaJ bhikkhave duccaritāni sāhārāni vadāmi, no anāhārāni. Ko cāhāro tiLLaJ duccaritānaJ? IndriyasaJvaroti’ssa vacanīyaJ. IndriyasaJvaraJ p’āhaJ bhikkhave sāhāraJ vadāmi no anāhāraJ. Ko cāhāro indriyasaJvarassa? Asatāsampajaññanti’ssa vacanīyaJ… Asatāsampajaññā p’āhaJ bhikkhave sāhāraJ vadāmi; no anāhāraJ… Ko cāhāro asatāsampajaññassa? Ayoniso manasikāroti’ssa vacanīyaJ. AyonisomanasikāraJ p’āhaJ bhikkhave sāhāraJ vadāmi; no anāhāraJ. Ko cāhāro ayonisomanasikārassa? Assaddhiyanti’ssa vacanīyaJ. AssaddhiyaJ p’āhaJ bhikkhave sāhāraJ vadāmi; no anāhāraJ. Ko cāhāro assaddhiyassa? Asaddhammasavananti’ssa vacanīyaJ. AsaddhammasavanaJ p’āhaJ bhikkhave sāhāraJ vadāmi; no anāhāraJ. Ko cāhāro asaddhamasavanassa? Asappurisa saJsevoti’ssa vacanīyaJ.” AN. 5:113.
[^p55-1]: Soma Thera, trans., The Way of Mindfulness, being a translation of the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta of the Majjhima Nikāya; its Commentary, the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta Va55anā of the Papañcasūdanī of Buddhaghosa Thera; and Excerpts from the Līnatthapakāsanā)īkā, Marginal Notes, of Dhammapāla Thera on the Commentary, (Kandy, Ceylon: Buddhist Publication Society, 1941-1967), p.116 (hereafter cited as Soma Thera, Way of Mindfulness).
[^p55-2]: “Ayoniso bhikkhave manasikaroto anuppanno ceva kāmachando uppajjati uppanno ca kāmacchando bhīyyobhāvāya vepullāya saJvattati. Anuppanno ceva byāpādo uppajjati… AnuppannaJ ceva thīnamiddhaJ…, uddhaccakukkuccaJ…, Ayoniso ca bhikkhave manasikaroto anuppannāceva vicikicchā uppajjati, uppannā ca vicikicchā bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya saJvattati.” SN. 5:93-94.
[^p56-1]: “Seyyathāpi bhikkhave ayaJ kāyo āhāra::hitiko āhāraJ pa:icca ti::hati anāhāro no ti::hati. EvaJ eva kho bhikkhave pañca nīvaraLā āhāra::hitikā āhāraJ pa:icca ti::hanti, anāhāraJ no ti::hanti. [1] Ko ca bhikkhave āhāro anuppannassa vā kāmacchandassa uppādāya uppannassa vā kāmacchandassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? Atthi bhikkhave subhanimittaJ; tattha ayonisomana- sikārabahulīkāro ayaJ āhāro anuppannassa vā kāmacchandassa uppādāya uppannassa vā kāma- cchandassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya. [2] Ko ca bhikkhave āhāro anuppannassa vā byāpādassa uppādāya uppannassa vā byāpādassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? Atthi bhikkhave pa:ighanimittaJ. Tattha ayonisomanasikārabahulīkāro ayaJ āhāro anuppannassa vā byāpādassa uppādāya uppannassa vā byāpādassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya. [3] … thīnamiddhassa…? Atthi bhikkhave arati tandivijambhitā, bhattasammado, cetaso ca līna- ttaJ; tattha… [4] … uddhaccakukkuccassa…? … cetaso avūpasamo… [5] … vicikicchāya uppādāya…? Atthi bhikkhave vicikicchā::hāniyā dhammā, tattha ayoniso manasikārabahulīkāro ayaJ āhāro anuppannāya vā vicikicchāya uppādāya uppannāya vā viciki- cchāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya.” SN. 5:64-65.
[^p57-1]: For the gradual training, see DN. 1:47-86. MN. 1:175-84; 271-80. For satipaṭṭhāna, see DN. 2:290-315 and MN. 1:55-63.
[^p58-1]: Dial., 1:3-26; DN. 1:64-69.
[^p59-1]: DN. 1:70. MN. 1:180-81.
[^p59-2]: DN. 1:70. MN. 1:181.
[^p59-3]: DN. l:71. MN. 1:180.
[^p59-4]: MLS. 1:227. “So pacchābhattaJ piLYapāta-pa:ikkanto nisīdati pallaKkaJ ābhujitvā ujuJ kāyaJ paLidhāya parimukhaJ satiJ upa::hapetvā. So abhijjhaJ loke pahāya vigatābhijjhena cetasā viharati, abhijjhāya cittaJ parīsodheti. Vyāpāda-padosaJ pahāya avyāpanna-citto viharati, sabba-pāLa- bhūtahitānukampī vyāpāda-padosā cittaJ parisodheti. ThīnamiddhaJ pahāya vigata-thīnamiddho viharati, ālokasaññī sato sampajāno thīna-middhā cittaJ parisodheti. Uddhacca-kukkuccaJ pahāya anuddhato viharati, ajjhattaJ vūpasanta citto uddhacca-kukkuccā cittaJ parisodheti. VicikicchaJ pahāya tiLLa vicikiccho viharati, akathaJkathī kusalesu dhammesu vicikicchāya cittaJ parisodheti.” MN. 1:181. DN. 1:71.
[^p60-1]: MLS. 3:344. “Sace, bhikkhu paccavekkhamāno evaJ jānāti: ‘Appahīnā kho me pañca nīvaraLā’ti, tena, … bhikkhunā pañcannaJ nīvaraLānaJ pahānāya vāyamitabbaJ.” MN. 3:295.
[^p60-2]: DN. 2:300-301.
[^p60-3]: Soma Thera, Way of Mindfulness, p. 117. “Yoniso manasikāro nāma upāyamanasikāro patha manasikāro anicce aniccanti vā dukkhe dukkhanti vā anattani anattāti vā asubhe asubhanti vā manasikāro.” MN.A. 1:286.
[^p60-4]: KS. 5:7l. “Yoniso ca kho bhikkhave manasikaroto anuppanno ceva kāmacchando (… vicikicchā) nūppajjati. Uppanno ca kāmacchando (… vicikicchā) pahīyati.” SN. 5:85.
[^p60-5]: KS. 5:88. “Ko ca bhikkhave anāhāro anuppannassa vā kāmacchandassa uppādāya uppannassa vā kāmacchandassa bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya? Atthi bhikkhave asubbanimittaJ. Tattha yonisomanasikāra- bahulīkāro ayaJ anāhāro anuppannassa vā kāmacchandassa uppādāya uppannassa vā kāmacchandassa bhi- yyobhāvāya vepullāya.” SN. 5:105.
[^p60-6]: Ibid., pp. 105-106.
[^p61-1]: Soma Thera, Way of Mindfulness, p. 117. “Asubhanimittassa uggaho asubhabhāvanānuyogo indriyesu guttadvāratā bhojane mattaññutā kalyāLamittatā sappāyakathā’ti.” MN.A. 1:286.
[^p61-2]: Soma Thera, Way of Mindfulness, p. 120. “Mettānimittassa uggaho mettābhāvanānuyogo kamassakatāpaccavekkhanā pa:isankhanābahulatā kalyāLamittatā sappāyakathā’ti” MN.A. 1:287.
[^p61-3]: Soma Thera, Way of Mindfulness, p. 123. “Atibhojane nimittaggāho iriyāpathasamparivattanatā āloka- saññāmanasikāro abbhokāsavāso kalyāLamittatā sappāyakathā’ti.” MN. A. 1:288.
[^p61-4]: Soma Thera, Way of Mindfulness, p. 124. “Bahussutatā paripucchakatā vinaye pakataññutā vuddhasevitā kalyāLamittatā sappāyakathā’ti.” MN.A. 1:289.
[^p61-5]: Soma Thera, Way of Mindfulness, p. 126. “Bahussutatā paripucchakatā vinaye pakataññutā adhimokkha- bahulatā kalyāLamittatā sappāyakathā’ti.” MN.A. 1:290.
[^p62-1]: PP., p. 157. “Yo hi bhikkhu kāmādīnavapaccavekkhanādīhi kāmacchandaJ na su::hu vikkhambhetvā, kāyapassaddhivasena kāyadu::hullaJ na su::hu pa:ipassaddhaJ katvā, ārambhadhātumanasikārādivasena thīnamiddhaJ na su::hu pa:ivinodetvā, samathanimittamanasikārādivasena uddhaccakukkuccaJ na su::hu samūhataJ katvā, aññe pi samādhiparipanthe dhamme na su::hu visodhetvā jhānaJ samāpajjati, so avisodhitaJ āsayaJ pavi::habhamaro viya, avisuddhaJ uyyānaJ pavi::harājā viya ca, khippaJ-eva nikkhamati.” Vism., p. 122.
[^p62-2]: DN. 2:290-315. MN. 1:55-63.
[^p63-1]: Dial., 2:334-35. “Idha bhikkhave bhikkhu santaJ vā ajjhattaJ kāmacchandaJ ‘atthi me ajjhattaJ kāmacchando’ti’ pajānāti, asantaJ vā ajjhattaJ kāmacchandaJ ’n’atthi me ajjhattaJ kāmacchando’ti pajānāti. Yathā ca anuppannassa kāmacchandassa uppādo hoti taJ ca pajānāti, yathā ca uppannassa kāmacchandassa pahānaJ hoti taJ ca pajānāti, yathā ca pahinassa kāmacchandassa āyatiJ anuppādo hoti taJ ca pajānāti… ajjhattaJ vyāpādaJ… thīnamiddhaJ… uddhaccakukkuccaJ… vicikicchaJ ’atthi me ajjhattaJ vicikicchā’ti pajānāti, asantaJ vā ajjhattaJ vicikicchaJ ’n’atthi me ajjhattaJ vicikiccha’ti pajānāti. Yathā ca anuppannāya vicikicchāya uppado hoti taJ ca pajānāti, yathā ca uppanāya vicikicchāya pahānaJ hoti taJ ca pajānāti, yathā ca pahīnāya vicikicchāya āyatiJ anuppādo hoti taJ ca pajānāti.” DN. 2:300-301.
[^p64-1]: PP., p. 802. Vism., p. 589.
[^p64-2]: “TesaJ pañca nīvaraLā pahīnā ucchinnamūlā tālāvatthukatā anabhāvakatā āyatiJ anuppādadhammā.” SN. 5:327.
[^p65-2]: Dial., 1:84. DN. 1:73.
[^p65-3]: KS. 5:103. “AtthatthaJ pi… paratthaJ pi… ubhayatthaJ pi tasmiJ samaye yathābhūtaJ na jānāti na passati.” SN. 5:121-22.
[^p65-4]: AN. 2:67
[^p65-5]: KS. 5:79. “Cetaso upakkilesā paññāya dubbalikaraLā.” SN. 5:94.
[^p65-6]: KS. 5:81. “NīvaraLā andhakaraLā acakkhukaraLā aññāLakaraLā paññānirodhikā vighātapakkhiyā anibbānisaJvattanikā.” SN. 5:97.
[^p65-7]: Nyānaponika Thera, trans. and ed., The Five Mental Hindrances And Their Conquest, Selected Texts from the Pali Canon and the Commentaries. (Kandy, Ceylon: Buddhist Publication Society, 1961), p.2 (hereafter cited as Nyānaponika, Five Mental Hindrances). “EvaJ eva kho bhikkhave pañcime cittassa upakkilesā, yehi upakkilesehi upakkili::haJ cittaJ na ceva mudu hoti, na ca kamaniyaJ na ca pabhassaraJ pabhaKgu ca na ca sammāsamādhiyati āsavānaJ khayayā.” AN. 3:16.
[^p65-8]: KS. 5:124. “Akusalarāsi ti bhikkhave vadamāno pañcanīvaraLe sammāvadamāno vadeyya. Kevalo hāyaJ bhikkhave akusalarāsi yadidaJ pañcanīvaraLā.” SN. 5:145.
[^p65-9]: Dial. 1:84. “Seyyathā pi mahārāja ānanyaJ yathā ārogyaJ yathā bandhanā mokkhaJ yathā bhujissaJ yathā khemantabhūmiJ, evaJ eva kho mahārāja bhikkhu ime pañca nīvaraLe pahīne attani samanupassati.” DN. 1:73.
[^p66-1]: Nyānaponika, Five Mental Hindrances, pp. 2-3. “Yato ca kho bhikkhave cittaJ imehi pañcahi upakkilesehi vimuttaJ hoti, taJ hoti cittaJ mudu ca kammaniyaJ ca pabhassaraJ ca na ca pabhaKgu sammā samādhiyati āsavānaJ khayāya. Yassa yassa ca abhiññāsacchikaraLīyassa dhammassa cittaJ abhinnāmeti abhiññāsacchikiriyāya tatra tatra’eva sakkhibhabbataJ pāpuLāti sati sati āyatane.” AN. 3:17-17.
[^p66-2]: To speak of the Brahmavihāras as an alternative to the attainment of jhāna is perhaps misleading. The emotional states comprised by the Brahmavihāras are meditation subjects used to achieve serenity, and the full development of the Brahmavihāras issues in the jhānas.
[^p66-3]: DN. 3:49-50.
[^p66-4]: DN. 1:110. MN. l:380.
[^p66-5]: KS. 5:29. “Ye te āvuso Mahānāma bhikkhū sekhā appattamānasā anuttaraJ yogakkhemaJ patthayamānā viharanti, te pañca nīvaraLe pahāya viharanti.” SN. 5:327.
[^p66-6]: MLS. 1:228-29. “So evaJ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaKgane vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye:hite ānejjappatte,” MN. 1:182.
[^p66-7]: “PubbenivāsānussatiñāLāya… sattānaJ cutūpapātañāLāya… āsavānaJ khayañāLāya cittaJ abhininnā- meti.” MN. 1:183.
[^p67-1]: “Ye kho keci lokamhā niyyiJsu vā niyyanti vā niyyissanti vā, sabbe te pañca nīvaraLe pahāya cetaso upakkilese paññāya dubbalīkaraLe catusu satipa::hānesu supati::hitacittā sattabojjhaKge yathābhūtaJ bhāvetvā evaJ ete lokamhā niyyiJsu vā niyyanti vā niyyissanti vā.” AN. 5:195.
[^p67-2]: Dial. 2:89. DN. 2:83.
[^p67-3]: KS. 5:49-50. “ImesaJ kho bhikkhave pañcannaJ nīvaraLānaJ abhiññāya pariññāya parikkhayāya pahānāya ayaJ ariyo a::haKgiko maggo bhāvetabbo’ti.” SN. 5:60.
