## THE FIRST JHÀNA AND ITS FACTORS

The attainment of jhāna, as we said at the outset of the last chapter, can be understood from two points of view: one is the elimination of the states obstructive to its attainment, the factors to be abandoned (pahāna/gāni); the other the acquisition of the states constituting its attainment, the factors of possession (samannāgata/gāni) or jhāna factors (jhāna/gāni). In the case of the first jhāna the factors to be abandoned are the five hindrances. As the meditator strives with diligence to develop concentration he eventually succeeds in suppressing the hindrances, entering the threshold stage of access concentration (upacārasamādhi) where the jhāna factors are contained in fledgling form. Then, with continued exertions, the jhāna factors ripen to the point where they can thrust the mind into the first jhāna, the initial stage of absorption (appanāsamādhi).

The jhāna factors are the five mental states: applied thought (vitakka), sustained thought (vicāra), rapture (pīti), happiness (sukha), and one-pointedness of mind (cittass’ekaggatā). Four of these are mentioned in the formula for the jhāna; the fifth,[^p68-1] one-pointedness, is added elsewhere. Having led the mind to the jhāna, these five phenomena remain in the jhāna as its constituting factors. They do not enter the first jhāna as mere extrinsic adjuncts, but as defining properties, giving it a distinct shape and character. Thence to understand the first jhāna it is necessary to approach it via a study of its factors.

In the present chapter we will examine in detail each of the five factors belonging to the first jhāna. We will give special attention to the specific qualities and functions these phenomena possess in the structure of the jhāna, as opposed to their occurrence elsewhere. Then we will take a general overview of the jhāna itself in order to make it clear that the first jhāna is not just a chance combination of unconnected factors but an organic unity of many coordinate states. This will be followed by a look at the place of the jhāna in the process of consciousness, the cognitive series used to show the dynamic nature of experience. We will conclude the chapter with some remarks on the ways of perfecting the first jhāna, a necessary prelude to the higher development of concentration.

## Vitakka: A. General

The word vitakka, derived from the Pāli root tak (Skt. tark) meaning “to think,” frequently appears in the texts in conjunction with the other word vicāra, which derives from the root car (P. & Skt.) meaning “to move.” The two together signify two interconnected but distinct aspects of the thought process. The primary word takka

means literally “thinking”; the prefix vi gives it a strengthened sense, so that vitakka[^p69-1] means pronounced or decisive thinking.

The word vitakka is often found in the suttas in various contexts all suggestive of this meaning of thought. It appears in several places as the final term in a sequence preceded by feeling (vedanā) and perception (saññā). Thus referring to himself, the Buddha states that he is aware in every case of the arising, persistence, and passing away of feelings, perceptions, and vitakkas:

Here, Ananda, in the Tathāgata feelings are understood as they arise, as they remain present, as they pass away; perceptions are understood as they arise, as they remain present, as they pass away; applied thoughts (vitakkā) are[^p69-2] understood as they arise, as they remain present, as they pass away. (Wr. tr.).

Vitakka takes the same objects as perception. It is divided into six classes by way of its objects; thus there are thoughts about forms, thoughts about sounds, thoughts about smells, thoughts about tastes, thoughts about tangibles, and thoughts about ideas. Because vitakka has the same objects as perception, but follows the latter in the account of the cognitive process, it is clearly a development and advance beyond the perceptual function. This is borne out by the MadhupiLYika Sutta where vitakka is shown following perception in the process by which mental impediments (papañca) come to obsess the mind. The great disciple Mahākaccāyana explains that in dependence on the sense faculties and their objects consciousness arises. The meeting of the faculty, object, and consciousness is contact (phassa). In dependence on contact feeling arises. Then: “What one feels one perceives; what one perceives one thinks about; what one thinks about[^p69-3] becomes an impediment.” (Wr. tr.).

The understanding of vitakka as thought is further supported by an important passage from the Culavedalla Sutta. Here the wise bhikkhunī Dhammadinnā describes vitakka and vicāra as “activity of speech” (vacisa.khāra), giving as the reason: “Having first had applied thought and sustained thought, one subsequently breaks out into speech,[^p69-4] therefore applied thought and sustained thought is activity of speech.” (Wr. tr.). The commentary defines “activity of speech” as that which “causes, creates, or activates[^p69-5] speech,” (Wr. tr.), and classifies as activities causing speech vitakka, vicāra, and the wholesome and unwholesome volitions motivating verbal expression. The sub-commentary to the sutta explains that vitakka and vicāra are said to activate speech[^p69-1] because “the mind without vitakka and vicāra is unable to make a verbal sound.”

(Wr. tr.). Since the inner verbal formulation of ideas precedes and governs their articulation through the apparatus of verbal expression, the key factors in the thinking process are also the mainsprings of intelligible speech.

The thought element in vitakka again comes to light in the use of the doubly augmented word parivitakka to mean “reflection” or “ratiocination.” We frequently see in the texts an individual sitting in solitude give rise to a chain of parivitakkas, reflections or reasonings in his mind, which he then expresses outwardly at a later time. Thus, for example, when the Buddha was considering the difficulties the average person would meet in understanding the Dhamma, it is said: “Then as the Lord was meditating in[^p70-2] seclusion a reasoning arose in his mind thus...” “Reflections on reasons” (akaraparivitakka) is further mentioned as one of the inadequate grounds for adopting a[^p70-3] belief rejected in the famous passage of the Kālāma Sutta.

Elsewhere the Buddha speaks of eight thoughts of a great man (mahāpurisā vitakkā), which he recommends to his disciples. These are the thoughts that the Dhamma is

1. for one who wants little. 2. for one who is contented. 3. for the secluded, 4. for the energetic, 5. for one who is mindful, 6. for the composed, 7. for the wise, and 4 8. for one who delights in freedom from impediments.

Here the identification of vitakka with thought appears quite explicit.

Nevertheless, although vitakka does function as an essential ingredient in discursive thinking, it would be premature to equate it flatly with verbally formulated thought. The reason for this qualification is that vitakka also occurs in states of consciousness where thought formulation is not in evidence, as for example in the consciousness of the first jhāna, in the supramundane consciousness of the noble path, as well as in more primitive types of bare sense cognition. Thence the question arises as to whether vitakka has a more elemental meaning than verbalized thinking, and if so, what that meaning is.

The answers to these questions are provided by the Abhidhamma, building upon a suggested solution already found in the suttas. The suttas use the word saṅkappa –

usually translated “thought,” “intention,” or “aim” – as an interchangeable equivalent of vitakka. In one passage of the Mahācattarīsaka Sutta the Buddha defines sammāsaṅkappa, the “right intention” occurring in the supramundane path, by a chain of[^p71-1] synonyms inclusive of vitakka. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi, in its analysis of the states, picks up these synonyms and gives a definition of wholesome vitakka identical in all respects with the sutta definition except that it omits the phrases limited to the supramundane path.

The ratiocination, the conception (vitakka), which on that occasion is the disposition [intention], the fixation, the focussing, the application of the mind,[^p71-2] right intention – this is the “conception” (vitakka) that there then is.

The Dhammasaṅgaṇi A::akathā elaborates upon these terms as follows:

“Intention” (saṅkappa) conveys the sense of thorough-designing. And fixation is the applying the selective mind to the object. Next, “focussing” is a term for “strong fixation,” intensified by a prefix. Then, “uplift of mind” [application of the mind] is the elevating or setting up of consciousness on to an object. And “right intention” is intention which is praiseworthy, which has[^p71-3] won to a moral state because of its veracity and progressiveness.

The explicative phrase which reveals most about the actual nature and function of vitakka is the expression cetaso abhiniropanā, “the application of mind,” which is explained as the lifting or mounting of consciousness onto the object. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā singles out this aspect as the primary characteristic of vitakka and illustrates it with a brief analogy:

Its [main] characteristic is the lifting of consciousness on to the object; having an object, it lifts consciousness up to it. As someone depending on a relative or friend dear to the king ascends the king’s palace, so depending on initial application the mind ascends the object. Therefore it has been said that initial[^p71-4] application lifts the mind on to the object.

This function of applying the mind to the object seems to be the unifying element underlying the different modes in which vitakka occurs, giving it a single quality despite the diversity of its applications. In the processes of discursive thinking, thoughtconception, and imagination the operation of vitakka may be more conspicuous than in other cognitive processes. But wherever it occurs its directive function is at work,

becoming especially prominent in the first jhāna, where discursive thought has subsided but vitakka remains.

In an illuminating discussion, Shwe Zan Aung shows how the directing of the mind and its concomitants to an object is the elemental meaning of vitakka, applicable in every case where its operation is discernible. Aung explains:

[In cognition of sense objects] the element of vitakka is present as a directing of concomitant elements to a sensible object. In imagination vitakka directs to an image; in conception, to an idea; in symbolical conception, to a concept; in judgments (vinicchaya-vīthi), to a proposition; in reasoning (takkavīthi), alluded to, but not discussed in my Essay (it belongs to the province of logic), to a syllogism or an inference. In doubt, vitakka is a directing now to one object, now to another, back again, etc. In distraction vitakka is a directing of mind to several objects one after another. In first jhāna, vitakka is a directing of mind to the ‘after-image’ etc., and in transcendental consciousness, vitakka is a directing of mind to nibbāna, the Ideal. So engaged it is called sammā[^p72-1] saṅkappa, perfect aspiration.

A problem seems to arise from the fact that, according to the abhidhammic system of analysis, vitakka is not a universal concomitant of consciousness. It is not present in every state of consciousness. So the question arises how, in those states of consciousness devoid of vitakka, the mind can be mounted onto its object. The commentary to the Majjhima Nikāya answers that when vitakka is absent the mind is directed upon its object through its own nature (attano dhammatāya), without dependence on other[^p72-2] states. At the level of the second jhāna, after vitakka has subsided, the mind remains focussed on its object even more intensely than before, despite the absence of vitakka. The Majjhima Nikāya subcommentary explains that a state of mind without vitakka can mount upon the object by the power of vitakka itself through the force of previous experience. Just as a person who has become familiar with a king can enter his dwelling freely without hesitation, so the mind which has gained experience of the object by[^p72-3] means of vitakka can remain focussed on the object even after vitakka has left the mind.

## Vitakka: B. Specific

Vitakka can be divided into two kinds – the wholesome (kusala) and the unwholesome (akusala). We will now examine each of these two types of vitakka, beginning with the unwholesome, then deal with vitakka in the specific context of the first jhāna and as a factor in the supramundane path.

Akusala Vitakka In itself vitakka is neither unwholesome (akusala) nor wholesome (kusala). It is merely the intrinsically indeterminate function of directing the mind and its concomitants onto the object. Its moral quality is determined by its associated factors, especially its underlying roots. When it is associated with the unwholesome roots – greed (lobha), hatred (dosa), and delusion (moha) – it becomes unwholesome vitakka, When it is associated with the wholesome roots – non-greed (alobha), non-hatred (adosa), and non-delusion (amoha) – it becomes wholesome vitakka. The vitakka influenced by these roots can reach expression physically as unwholesome bodily action (akusalakāyakamma) or verbally as unwholesome verbal action (akusalavacīkamma). If it does not express itself outwardly it remains internal pertaining to unwholesome mental action (akusalamanokamma).

Unwholesome vitakkas are enumerated in the suttas as threefold: thoughts of sensuality (kāmavitakka), thoughts of ill will (byāpādavitakka), and thoughts of harming (vihi/sāvitakka). The former is thought rooted in the factor of greed; the latter two are differing expressions of thought rooted in hatred or aversion. In describing his practice during his search for enlightenment the Buddha explains that he divided vitakkas into two categories, the wholesome and the unwholesome. On the unwholesome side he placed thoughts of sensuality, thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of harming. Whenever one of these thoughts would arise in him he would dispel it by reflecting that these thoughts lead to the harm of oneself, to the harm of others, and to the harm of both; they[^p73-1] are destructive of wisdom, conduce to vexation, and lead away from nibbāna. He then explains that whenever one frequently thinks and ponders on these unwholesome[^p73-2] thoughts, the mind inclines to them and makes them habitual.

Unwholesome thoughts (akusalavitakka) are also called unwholesome intentions (akusalasaṅkappa), the words vitakka and saṅkappa being used interchangeably. Thus the Buddha also declares that there are three unwholesome intentions – namely, intentions for sense pleasures, for ill will, and for harming. In the SamanamaLYikā Sutta the Buddha states that these unwholesome intentions originate from perception:

And how, carpenter, do these unskilled intentions originate? Their origination is spoken of too. It should be answered that their origination is in perception. Which perception, for perceptions are many, various, diverse? Perception of sense-pleasure, perception of malevolence, perception of harming – origin[^p73-3] ating from these are unskilled intentions.

In the Saṃyutta Nikāya the Buddha explains that intentions of sensuality arise in dependence on sensual perceptions and issue in sensual desire (kāmacchanda), the fever of sensuality (kāmapari8āha), and the search for sensual gratification (kāmapariyesanā).

Engaged in this sensual search the worldling practices wrongly in three ways: by body, speech, and mind. The same pattern is repeated for intentions of ill will and intentions of[^p74-1] harming.

Beyond these three, other minor types of unwholesome thoughts are spoken of in an unspecified way as “evil unwholesome thoughts” (pāpakā akusalā vitakkā). The Buddha declares that the suppression and elimination of all unwholesome thoughts and intentions is one of the essential disciplines of the spiritual life. He says that a monk in training

... wisely reflective, does not give in to thought about sense pleasures that has arisen, he gets rid of it, he eliminates it, makes an end of it, sends it to its ceasing; he does not give in to malevolent thought... to thought of harming... to evil unskilled mental objects that have constantly arisen, he gets rid of[^p74-2] them, eliminates them, makes an end of them, sends them to their ceasing.

He also states that when unwholesome perceptions arise in a recluse or brahmin, if he does not quickly dispel them and eliminate them “he both fares ill here, with trouble, despair, yearning, and at the separation of the body, after death, has to expect a bad[^p74-3] destiny.”

In striving for jhāna, a yogin will have to eliminate all unwholesome vitakkas. These will be the vitakkas associated with the five hindrances. The vitakka associated with the first hindrance, sensual desire, is clearly thought of sense pleasures. Thoughts of ill will and thoughts of harming will cluster around the hindrance of ill will. The vitakkas connected with the remaining hindrances can be seen as comprised in the “evil, unwholesome states” which a monk has to overcome in the course of his training. The texts record several minor distracting thoughts as “thoughts about relatives, thoughts[^p74-4] about one’s district, and thoughts about one’s reputation.” The Buddha declares that all unwholesome thoughts cease without remainder in the first jhāna, the practice for eliminating unwholesome thoughts being the four right endeavors – the endeavor to abandon arisen unwholesome states, to prevent unarisen unwholesome states from[^p74-5] arising, to arouse unarisen wholesome states, and to develop arisen wholesome states.

Kusala Vitakka Kusala vitakka or wholesome thought occurs at three levels:

(a) the wholesome thought of ordinary morally virtuous states of consciousness,

(b) the wholesome thought of the first jhāna, and

(c) the wholesome thought of the supramundane path consciousness present as noble right intention (ariya sammā saṅkappa).

Ordinary kusala vitakka

Vitakka becomes wholesome in association with the three wholesome roots, of non-greed, non-hatred, and non-delusion. Kammically wholesome thoughts that do not directly involve a higher spiritual experience are analyzed in the suttas as threefold: thoughts of renunciation (nekkhammavitakka), thoughts of benevolence (abyāpādavitakka), and thoughts of harmlessness (avihi/sāvitakka). These three are the direct antitheses of the three unwholesome thoughts. The thought of renunciation opposes the thought of sensuality, the thought of benevolence the thought of ill will, the thought of harmlessness the thought of harming. The Buddha explains that when he was a Bodhisatta he established a category of wholesome thoughts into which he put the three thoughts of renunciation, benevolence, and harmlessness. He understood that these thoughts conduce neither to the harm of oneself, to the harm of others, or to the harm of both, that they lead to the growth of wisdom, to freedom from vexation, and to the attainment of nibbāna. Moreover, he declares, by thinking and pondering on the thought of renunciation one can expel thoughts of sensuality; by thinking thoughts of benevolence one can expel thoughts of ill will; and by thinking thoughts of harmlessness[^p75-1] one can expel thoughts of harming.

Wholesome thoughts are also spoken of in the suttas under the name “wholesome[^p75-2] intentions” (kusalasaṅkappa), which are of the same threefold nature. The Buddha declares that the intention of renunciation originates from the perception of renunciation (nekkhammasaññā). It issues in the desire for renunciation (nekkhammacchanda), the yearning for renunciation (nekkhammapari8āha), and the search for renunciation (nekkhammapariyesanā). Engaged in this search the noble disciple practices rightly in three ways: by body, speech, and mind. The same pattern is repeated for intentions of[^p75-3] benevolence and harmlessness.

In the VitakkasaL:hāna Sutta the Buddha recommends five methods of using wholesome thoughts (kusalavitakka) to overcome unwholesome thoughts (akusalavitakka), here classified by way of their roots as connected with desire, hatred, and delusion. One method involves applying a wholesome thought to eliminate the unwholesome thought directly opposed to it:

Like an experienced carpenter or carpenter’s apprentice, striking hard at, pushing out, and getting rid of a coarse peg with a fine one, should the bhikkhu in order to get rid of the adventitious object, reflect on a different object which is connected with skill. Then the evil unskillful thoughts connected with desire, hate and delusion are eliminated; they disappear. By

their elimination, the mind stands firm, settles down, becomes unified, and[^p76-1] concentrated, just within (his subject of meditation).

The other four ways of overcoming unwholesome thoughts are

(i) pondering on their disadvantages (ādīnava),

(ii) trying not to pay any attention to them,

(iii) reflecting on the removal of the [thought] source of those unskilful thoughts, and

(iv) with clenched teeth and tongue pressing the palate, restraining, subduing, and[^p76-2] beating down the [evil] mind by the [good] mind.

This advice is given to a bhikkhu who is training himself to attain the higher consciousness (adhicitta), an equivalent term for jhāna. When unwholesome thoughts arise from time to time hindering his progress, he can develop wholesome thoughts to overcome them. The commentary explains that he should reflect on an unlovely object (asubhanimitta) in order to overcome lustful thought connected with living beings and on impermanence in order to overcome thoughts of desire connected with inanimate objects. He should cultivate loving kindness in order to overcome hatred towards living beings and on the modes of materiality (dhātumanasikāro) to overcome hatred towards[^p76-3] inanimate objects.

Kusalavitakka in jhāna The general function of vitakka, as we have seen, is to direct the mind and its associated factors onto the object. In jhāna this function becomes stronger and more pronounced than on other occasions. On occasions of jhānic consciousness it would perhaps be more exact to say that vitakka thrusts its concomitants into the object rather than that it directs them onto the object. The Visuddhimagga thus characterizes the function of jhānic vitakka to be “to strike at and thresh – for the meditator is said, in virtue of it, to have the[^p76-4] object struck at by applied thought, threshed by applied thought.”

In the context of jhāna, vitakka is qualified by another term, appanā, meaning absorption. The Milindapañha states this quality of absorption to be the salient characteristic of vitakka: “Vitakka, your majesty, has the characteristic of absorption. Just as a carpenter drives (appeti) a well-fashioned piece of wood into a joint so vitakka[^p77-1] has the characteristic of absorption.” (Wr. tr.). Shwe Zan Aung makes explicit the distinction between vitakka in ordinary states of consciousness and vitakka on occasions of jhāna as follows:

Ordinary vitakka merely throws its concomitants onto the surface, so to speak, of an object – i.e., it is the initiative element in cognition of a superficial kind. But appana-vitakka is mind penetrating into the inwardness or import of its object, and it has come to be applied to samādhi, ‘concentration’ or developed[^p77-2] individualization of thought.

Vitakka at the level of absorption is compared to a solid body, which sinks to the bottom of water and remains fixed there; the vitakka of ordinary consciousness is compared to a hollow ball which stays under the water when held down by pressure but rises to the[^p77-3] surface when the pressure is removed. The word appanā used to define vitakka comes to be applied to concentration of the jhānic level, called appanā samādhi or “absorptionconcentration” in contrast to the pre-jhānic concentration called upacāra samādhi or “access concentration.”

The object of jhāna into which vitakka thrusts the mind and its concomitants is the counterpart sign (paṭibhāganimitta). We already met this object in our discussion of the suppression of the hindrances, but its nature must now be further clarified. When a meditator begins his practice for the attainment of jhāna, he takes a preliminary object such as a colored or elemental kasi5a and concentrates on it until he is able to visualize it with his eyes closed as clearly as when he looks at it with eyes open. Whenever he notices that the object is not clear he should open his eyes and look at the object again until he is able to build up a clear mental impression of its mode of appearance. Then, remembering the appearance of the object, he should shut his eyes again and repeat the process of visualization as long as is required. When the object comes into focus when he attends to it with eyes shut as clearly as it does when he looks at it with open eyes the[^p77-4] learning sign (uggahanimitta) is said to have arisen. At this point the yogin should leave off the physical object and focus solely on the learning sign, developing it “by reiterated[^p77-5] reaction to it and by striking at it with applied thought and sustained thought.”

As he practices thus the jhāna factors grow in strength, each suppressing its respective hindrance. Vitakka, as we saw, counters the hindrance of sloth and torpor, eventually reducing it to a state of complete suppression. When the hindrances are suppressed and the defilements subside the mind enters access concentration. At this time the learning sign is replaced by the counterpart sign. The Visuddhimagga explains the difference between the two signs thus:

In the learning sign any fault in the kasina is apparent. But the counterpart sign appears as if breaking out from the learning sign, and a hundred times, a thousand times, more purified, like a looking-glass disk drawn from its case, like a mother-of-pearl dish well washed, like the moon’s disk coming out from behind a cloud, like cranes against a thunder cloud. But it has neither colour nor shape; for if it had, it would be cognizable by the eye, gross, susceptible of comprehension [by insight] and stamped with the three characteristics. But it is not like that. For it is born only of perception in one who has obtained[^p78-1] concentration, being a mere mode of appearance.

The counterpart sign is the object of both access concentration and jhāna. The difference between the latter two consists, not in their object, but in the strength of their respective jhāna factors. In the former the jhāna factors are still weak and not yet fully developed. In the latter they are developed to the point where they can actually thrust the mind into the object with the force of full absorption. In this process of thrusting, the factor most responsible for bringing about the mind’s absorption in the counterpart sign is the factor of vitakka.

Since vitakka in jhāna is associated with the wholesome roots, it will take form as a wholesome thought of renunciation, of benevolence and of harmlessness. Its occurrence in these modes stems from the abandonment of the hindrances of sensual desire and ill will, the defilements responsible for the three unwholesome thoughts of sensuality, ill will, and harming. Since vitakka is needed to directly counter the hindrance opposite to itself, it performs the task of suppressing sloth and torpor. And since vitakka has the general function of directing the mind to the object, it will also thrust the mind into the counterpart sign, keeping it fixed and focussed there with the intensity of absorption-concentration.

Kusalavitakka in the Noble Path The highest form of wholesome vitakka is the vitakka included in the Noble Eightfold Path. The Noble Eightfold Path, with its eight factors, operates at two levels – the mundane and the supramundane. The mundane (lokiya) path is developed on occasions of wholesome consciousness when the aspirant is striving to reach penetration of the

Four Noble Truths and to eradicate defilements. The supramundane (lokutara) path arises when the practice is fully mature. When this path arises it penetrates the four truths by realizing nibbāna as its object, simultaneously eradicating defilements.

Wholesome vitakka figures on both levels of the noble path as sammāsaṅkappa, “right intention”, the second factor of the path. At the mundane stage it is the threefold wholesome thought of renunciation, benevolence, and harmlessness. At the supramundane level it is the directive factor of consciousness which thrusts the mind upon its object, in this case nibbāna, the unconditioned element. The Buddha clarifies the twofold division of right intention in the Mahācattārīsaka Sutta as follows:

And what, monks, is the right purpose that has cankers, is on the side of merit, and ripens unto cleaving? Purpose for renunciation, purpose for non-ill will, purpose for nonharming. This, monks, is right purpose that... ripens unto cleaving.

And what, monks, is the right purpose that is ariyan, cankerless, supermundane, a component of the Way? Whatever, monks, is reasoning, initial thought, purpose, an activity of speech through the complete focussing and application of the mind in one who, by developing the ariyan Way, is of ariyan thought, of cankerless thought, and is conversant with the ariyan Way – this, monks, is right purpose that is ariyan, cankerless, supermundane, a component[^p79-1] of the Way.

Right intention in this latter sense is still a wholesome thought of renunciation, benevolence, and harmlessness, since it is associated with non-greed and non-hatred. Its primary characteristic, however, is its ability to lead the mind into absorption upon its supramundane object. Therefore it is this aspect which the Buddha emphasizes in his definition of the ariyan sammāsaṅkappa.

## Vicāra

Although the word vicāra and its derivatives almost invariably appear in the suttas in conjunction with the word vitakka and its derivatives, the use of two distinct terms and the occasional recognition that one can occur without the other suggest that they represent different aspects of the thought-process. Since vicāra always comes after vitakka it would seem to be a more developed phase of thought, and this suspicion is borne out by the Abhidhamma and commentaries. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi defines vicāra thus:

The process, the sustained procedure (vicāra), the progress and access [of the mind] which on that occasion is the [continuous] adjusting and focusing of[^p80-1] thought – this is discursive thought that there then is.

The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā and Visuddhimagga clarify this somewhat cryptic definition by analyzing vicāra in terms of its characteristic, function, and manifestation:

Sustained thinking (vicara5a) is sustained thought (vicāra); continued sustainment (anusañcara5a), is what is meant. It has the characteristic of continued pressure on (occupation with) the object. Its function is to keep conascent [mental] states [occupied] with that. It is manifested as keeping consciousness[^p80-2] anchored [on that object].

From this explanation several features of vicāra emerge. Firstly, by way of etymology, vicāra connotes continued movement; thus it is the mind’s continued movement in focussing upon the object. Secondly, by way of function, vicāra performs the task of fixing the mind and its states upon the object; it keeps them anchored there, sustaining the work of mental application effected by vitakka. And thirdly, vicāra plays the role of examination. Through its sustainment of the mind on the object it enables the mind to inspect, examine and investigate the object’s properties. As Shwe Zan Aung says:[^p80-3] “Vicāra is the continued exercise of the mind on that object.” And again: “Vicāra may largely operate in the stage of investigation and other processes, and would strongly[^p80-4] operate in all processes of comparison or discrimination.”

The commentaries spell out the differences between vitakka and vicāra as follows:

And though sometimes not separate, applied thought is the first impact of the mind in the sense that it is both gross and inceptive like the striking of a bell. Sustained thought is the act of keeping the mind anchored, in the sense that it is subtle with the individual essence of continued pressure, like the ringing of[^p80-5] the bell.

Buddhaghosa gives six analogies to illustrate the relationship between vitakka and vicāra.

1. Vitakka is analogous to the movement of a bird taking off into the air by flapping its wings, vicāra to its moving through the air gracefully and leisurely with outspread wings.

2. Vitakka is comparable to a bee’s flying towards a flower, vicāra to its buzzing around the flower. 3. Vitakka is like the striking of a bell, vicāra like its reverberation. 4. Vitakka is like the hand that holds firmly a tarnished metal dish that has to be cleaned; vicāra is like the other hand that rubs it with powder, oil, and a woolen pad. 5. Vitakka is like the supporting hand of a potter when he is making a pot, vicāra like the hand that moves back and forth. 6. Vitakka is like the compass pin that stays fixed to the center when one is drawing a[^p81-1] circle, vicāra like the pin that revolves around.

These similes make it clear that despite their constant concomitance, vitakka and vicāra perform different tasks, the former having a functional priority over the latter. Vitakka brings the mind to the object, vicāra fixes and anchors it there. Vitakka focuses the mind on the object, vicāra examines and inspects what is focussed on. Vitakka brings a deepening of concentration by again and again leading the mind back to the same object, vicāra sustains the concentration achieved by keeping the mind anchored on that object. In their union they are indispensable for the achievement and stabilization of the first jhāna.

## Pīti

The third jhāna factor present in the first jhāna is pīti, usually translated “joy” or “rapture”. The Venerable Ñānamoli, in his translation of the Visuddhimagga, renders it by “happiness”, but this rendering seems misleading since most translators use “happiness” as an English equivalent for sukha, the quality of pleasurable feeling present in the jhāna as its fourth factor. We will render pīti by “rapture”, thus maintaining the connection of the term with ecstatic meditative experience.

In the suttas pīti is sometimes said to arise from another aligned quality called pāmojja, translated as “joy” or “gladness.” Thus the Buddha states that with virtuous rules of conduct as support, freedom from remorse (avippa(isāra) arises; freedom from remorse[^p81-2] leads to gladness, gladness to rapture, and rapture to tranquility (passaddhi).

Again, he says that faith leads to gladness, gladness to rapture, and rapture to[^p81-3] tranquility. Gladness arises from seeing the abandonment of the hindrances. The Buddha says that when the disciple sees the five hindrances abandoned in himself “gladness (pāmojja) springs up within him on his realising that, and joy (pīti) arises to[^p81-4] him thus gladdened, and so rejoicing all his frame becomes at ease.” Tranquility (passaddhi) follows rapture and leads to a feeling of happiness (sukha), on the basis of which the mind becomes concentrated, entering the first jhāna. Thus we can see that

rapture precedes the actual arising of the first jhāna, but persists through the remaining stages and continues on as a jhāna factor up to the third jhāna.

For an analytic treatment of pīti, we must turn to the Abhidhamma pi:aka and the commentaries. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi defines the term thus:

What on that occasion is joy (pīti)? The joy which on that occasion is gladness, rejoicing at, rejoicing over, mirth and merriment, felicity, exultation,[^p82-1] transport of mind – this is the joy that there then is.

The commentaries pinpoint pīti in terms of its verbal derivation, characteristic, function, and manifestation:

It refreshes (pīnayati), thus it is [rapture]. It has the characteristic of endearing. Its function is to refresh the body and the mind, or its function is to[^p82-2] pervade (thrill with rapture). It is manifested as elation.

Rapture is closely associated with happiness (sukha), but remains different in nature. Happiness is a feeling and thus belongs to the aggregate of feelings (vedanākkhandha). Rapture, on the other hand, belongs to the aggregate of mental formations (sa/khārakkhandha). It is not hedonic but directive, referring to the object of consciousness. Shwe Zan Aung explains that “pãti abstracted means interest of varying degrees of intensity, in[^p82-3] an object felt as desirable, or as calculated to bring happiness.” When defined in terms of agency pīti is that which creates interest in the object; when defined in terms of its nature it is the interest created in the object. The Abhidhamma subcommentaries state:[^p82-4] “It is said that pīti has, as its characteristic mark, grasping the object qua desirable.” Because it creates a positive interest in the object, the jhāna factor of pīti is able to counter and suppress the hindrance of ill will. Ill will is a state of aversion implying a negative evaluation of the object. When pīti as pleasurable interest arises in the object it supplants the negative tendency towards aversion.

Both the Visuddhimagga and Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā present a gradation of pīti into five categories: minor rapture (khuddikā pīti), momentary rapture (khaṇikā pīti), showering rapture (okkantikā pīti), uplifting rapture (ubbegā pīti), and pervading rapture 5 (pharaṇā pīti). Of these five types, minor rapture is said to be able to raise the hairs on the body. Momentary rapture is like lightning produced moment by moment. Flooding rapture descends on the body and disappears like the waves breaking on the seashore. Transporting rapture is able to lift the physical body and cause it to move from one place to another. All-pervading rapture pervades the whole body. To illustrate the power of uplifting rapture, the commentaries relate the story of the elder Mahātissa, who “aroused

uplifting [rapture] with the Enlightened One as object, and rose into the air like a[^p83-1] painted ball bounced off a plastered floor.” They also relate the story of a young girl who aroused uplifting rapture while contemplating the thought of a shrine and travelled[^p83-2] to the shrine through the air, arriving before her parents who went there by foot.

The five kinds of rapture are evidently ranked in degrees of intensity, minor rapture representing the weakest degree and all-pervading rapture the strongest. The five in sequence bring about the gradual perfection of concentration:

Now this fivefold [rapture], when conceived and matured perfects the twofold tranquility, that is, bodily and mental tranquility. When tranquility is conceived and matured, it perfects the twofold bliss, that is, bodily and mental bliss. When bliss is conceived and matured, it perfects the threefold concentration, that is, momentary concentration, access concentration, and[^p83-3] absorption concentration.

Minor rapture is generally the first to appear in the progressive development of meditation, coming into being as defilements subside and the meditator experiences indications of successful concentration. Momentary rapture comes next. Though stronger in its impact than the earlier grade, momentary rapture, as its name indicates, is still ephemeral and cannot be sustained for long. Showering rapture runs through the body, producing a great thrill but without leaving a lasting impact. Uplifting rapture is more sustained but still tends to disturb concentration. The form of rapture most conducive to the deepening of concentration is all-pervading rapture. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā describes the effect of this rapture thus: “When all-pervading rapture arises, the whole body is completely surcharged, blown like a full[^p83-4] bladder or like a mountain cavern pouring forth a mighty flood of water.” The Visuddhimagga states that what is intended by the jhāna factor of rapture is this all-pervading rapture, “which is the root of absorption and comes by growth into[^p83-5] association with absorption.”

## Sukha

The next jhāna factor is sukha (happiness). The word “sukha” is used both as a noun meaning “happiness”, “ease”, “bliss”, or “pleasure”, and as an adjective meaning “blissful” or “pleasant”. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā presents a number of canonical uses of the term: “sukha” can mean pleasurable feeling (sukhavedanā), the root of happiness (sukhamūlā), pleasurable object (sukhāramma5ā), a cause of happiness (sukhahetu), an objective station occasioning happiness (sukhapaccaya((hānā), freedom[^p84-1] from trouble (abyāpajjha), nibbānic happiness, etc. In most contexts sukha means[^p84-2] pleasurable feeling. When it is said “The arising of the Buddhas is sukha,” sukha means root or basis of happiness. In the passage “Since, O Mahāli, form is sukha, falls[^p84-3] and descends on sukha,” the word signifies a pleasurable object. In the statement[^p84-4] “Merit, monks, is a synonym for sukha,” sukha means a cause of happiness. When it is[^p84-5] said: “They know not sukha who see not Nandana,” sukha signifies a station (or plane of existence) occasioning happiness. In the statement “These states constitute a sukha[^p84-6] life in this very world,” sukha means freedom from troubles. And in the phrase[^p84-7] “Nibbāna is the supreme sukha,” sukha is nibbanic happiness.

As a factor of the first jhāna sukha signifies felt happiness or pleasant feeling. The word is explicitly defined in this sense in the Vibhaṅga’s analysis of the first jhāna: “Therein, what is happiness? Mental pleasure, mental happiness, the felt pleasure and happiness born of mind-contact, pleasurable and happy feeling born of mind-contact – this is[^p84-8] called ‘happiness’.” (Wr. tr.). The Visuddhimagga explains that happiness in the first jhāna has the characteristic of gratifying, the function of intensifying associated states,[^p84-9] and as manifestation, the rendering of aid (to its associated states).

To understand precisely the nature of the happiness present in the first jhāna, a brief discussion of the Buddhist analysis of feeling is necessary. Feeling (vedanā) is a mental factor present in all types of consciousness; that is, it is a universal concomitant of experience (sabbacittasādhāraõā cetasika). Feeling has the characteristic of being felt (vedayita lakkha5ā), the function of experiencing (anubhavana rasā), and as

1 manifestation the gratification of the mental factors (cetasika-assādapaccupa((hānā). It is invariably said to be born of contact (phassa). Contact is the coming together (sa/gati) of a sense object, a sense faculty, and the appropriate type of consciousness. When these three come together consciousness makes contact with the object. It experiences the affective quality of the object, and from this experience a feeling arises[^p85-2] keyed to the object’s affective quality.

Since contact is of six kinds by way of the six sense faculties, feeling is also of six kinds corresponding to the six kinds of contact from which it is born. There is feeling born of eye-contact, feeling born of ear-contact, feeling born of nose, tongue, body, and[^p85-3] mind-contact. Feeling is also divided by way of its affective tone either into three or five classes. On the threefold division there is pleasant feeling (sukhāvedanā), painful feeling (dukkhāvedanā), and neither pleasant nor painful feeling (adukkhamasukhā vedanā), i.e., neutral feeling. The pleasant feeling may be subdivided into bodily pleasant feeling (kāyika sukha) called “pleasure” (sukha) and mental pleasant feeling (cetasikasukha) called “joy” (somanassa). The painful feeling may also be subdivided into bodily painful feeling (kāyikadukkha) called “pain” (dukkha) and mental painful feeling (cetasikadukkha) called “displeasure” (domanassa). In this system of classification the neutral feeling is called “equanimity” (upekkhā). Thus on the fivefold division we find the following five types of feeling: pleasure, joy, pain, displeasure, and[^p85-4] equanimity. According to the Abhidhamma, pleasure and pain are found only in association with body-consciousness, joy and displeasure only in association with mind-consciousness, and equanimity in association with both mind-consciousness and[^p85-5] the other four classes of sense consciousness.

The Vibhaṅga statement that the sukha of the first jhāna is mental happiness born of mind-contact means that it is a form of joy or somanassa. In the Aṅguttara Nikāya the Buddha enumerates contrasting types of mental happiness: the happiness of the household life and that of monastic life, the happiness of sense pleasures and that of renunciation, happiness with attachments and taints and happiness without attachments and taints, worldly happiness and spiritual happiness, the happiness of concentration and[^p85-6] happiness without concentration, etc. Happiness associated with greed and directed to pleasurable forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and tangibles is sensual happiness (kāmasukha). Happiness associated with the wholesome roots produced by the renunciation of sensual enjoyments is spiritual happiness (nirāmisasukha) or the happiness of renunciation (nekkhammasukha). The happiness of jhāna is a spiritual happiness born of seclusion from sense pleasures and the hindrances (pavivekasukha). It is also a happiness of concentration (samādhisukha).

The Buddha shows that happiness is causally conditioned. It arises in the sequence of conditions issuing in liberation. In this sequence it follows rapture (pīti) and tranquility (passaddhi) and leads to concentration (samādhi). The Upanisā Sutta says: “Gladness is the supporting condition for rapture; rapture is the supporting condition for tranquility,[^p86-1] tranquility for happiness, happiness for concentration.” (Wr. tr.). The commentary explains that “gladness” (pāmojja) represents the initial forms of rapture, “pīti” the stronger forms. “Tranquility” (passaddhi) is the calm that emerges through the subsiding of defilements; the happiness (sukha) to which it leads the commentary calls “the[^p86-2] happiness preceding absorption” and the subcommentary “the happiness pertaining to[^p86-3] the access to jhāna”. The resulting concentration is the pādakajjhāna, the jhāna forming a basis for insight. From this we can infer that the happiness included in this causal sequence is the nascent jhāna factor of sukha, which begins to emerge in the access stage and reaches full maturity in the actual jhāna itself. But since sukha is always present whenever pīti is present, it follows that sukha must have arisen at the very beginning of the sequence. In the stage bearing its name it only acquires special prominence, not a first appearance. When happiness gains in force, it exercises the function of suppressing its direct opposite, the hindrance of restlessness and worry, which causes unhappiness through its agitating nature.

Pīti and sukha link together in a very close relationship, so that it may be difficult to distinguish them. Nevertheless the two are not identical states. Sukha always accompanies pīti but pīti does not always accompany sukha: “Where there is pīti there is[^p86-4] sukha but where there is sukha there is not necessarily pīti.” (Wr. tr.). In the third jhāna there is sukha but no pīti. Pīti, as we noted, belongs to the aggregate of mental formations, sukha to the aggregate of feelings. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā explains pīti as “delight in the attaining of the desired object” and sukha as “the enjoyment of the taste of what is acquired.” The text illustrates the difference between them by means of a vivid simile.

Rapture is like a weary traveller in the desert in summer, who hears of, or sees water or a shady wood. Ease is like his enjoying the water or entering the forest shade. For a man who, travelling along the path through a great desert and overcome by the heat, is thirsty and desirous of drink, if he saw a man on the way, would ask, ‘Where is water?’ The other would say, ‘Beyond the wood is a dense forest with a natural lake. Go there, and you will get some.’ He hearing these words would be glad and delighted, and as he went would see lotus leaves, etc., fallen on the ground and become more glad and delighted.

Going onwards, he would see man with wet clothes and hair, hear the sounds of wild fowl and pea-fowl, etc., see the dense forest of green like a net of jewels growing by the edge of the natural lake, he would see the water lily, the lotus, the white lily, etc., growing in the lake, he would see the clear transparent water, he would be all the more glad and delighted, [118] would descend into the natural lake, bathe and drink at pleasure and, his oppression being allayed, he would eat the fibres and stalks of the lilies, adorn himself with the blue lotus, carry on his shoulders the roots of the mandalaka, ascend from the lake, put on his clothes, dry the bathing cloth in the sun, and in the cool shade where the breeze blew ever so gently lay himself down and say: ‘O bliss! O bliss!’ Thus should this illustration be applied: The time of gladness and delight from when he heard of the natural lake and the dense forest till he saw the water is like rapture having the manner of gladness and delight at the object in view. The time when, after his bath and drink he laid himself down in the cool shade, saying, ‘O bliss! O bliss!’, etc., is the sense of ease grown[^p87-1] strong, established in that mode of enjoying the taste of the object.

Pīti and sukha co-exist in the first jhāna. Therefore the commentarial simile should not be taken to imply that the two are mutually exclusive. Its purport is to suggest that pīti gains prominence before sukha, for which it helps provide a causal foundation.

In the description of the first jhāna, pīti and sukha are said to be “born of seclusion.” The Vibhaṅga elaborates: “They are born, well born, come into existence, come well[^p87-2] into existence, appear in this seclusion. Therefore ‘born of seclusion’ is said.” (Wr. tr.). The rapture and happiness born of seclusion, the Buddha states, suffuse the whole body of the meditator in such a way that there is no part of his body which remains unaffected by them. This he explains with the help of the following illustration:

Monks, take the case of a monk, who, aloof from sensuous appetites, enters and abides in the first jhāna; he steeps and drenches and fills and suffuses this body with zest [rapture] and ease [happiness] born of solitude, so that there is not one particle of the body that is not pervaded by this lone-born zest [rapture] and ease [happiness]. Monks, just as a handy bathman or attendant might strew bath powder in some copper basin and gradually sprinkling water, knead it together so that the bath-ball gathered up the moisture, became enveloped in moisture and saturated both in and out, but did not ooze moisture, even so a monk steeps, drenches fills and suffuses this body with zest and ease born of solitude, so that there is not one particle of the body that[^p87-3] is not pervaded by this lone-born zest [rapture] and ease [happiness].

This statement raises the question how mental qualities like rapture and happiness can suffuse a physical substance like the body. The subcommentary provides an answer. It says that “the material form produced by consciousness suffuses every area where there[^p88-1] is material form produced by kamma.” (Wr. tr.). The “material form produced by kamma” is the yogi’s physical body. The physical body contains material phenomena of four modes of origination; that is, material phenomena produced by kamma (kammaja. rūpa.), by consciousness (cittaja. rūpa.), by temperature (utuja. rūpa.), and by[^p88-2] food (āhāraja. rūpa.). When the yogin attains to jhāna, the jhāna consciousness produces a subtle kind of material form which suffuses his physical body. Since this material form is produced by a consciousness associated with rapture and happiness, the impression is created that rapture and happiness themselves suffuse the whole physical body.

## Ekaggatā

Unlike the previous four jhāna factors, ekaggatā or one-pointedness is not specifically mentioned in the standard formula describing the first jhāna. This omission has led some scholars to question the legitimacy of including one-pointedness among the jhāna factors. However, a more thorough examination of the canon and commentaries reveals this suspicion to be groundless.

Though one-pointedness is not found in the standard suttanta description of the first jhāna it is set forth as a factor of the jhāna in the Mahāvedalla Sutta where the Venerable Sāriputta states: “The first meditation is five-factored: if a monk has entered on the first meditation there is initial thought and discursive thought and rapture and joy and one-pointedness of mind. Thus, your reverence, is the first meditation[^p88-3] five-factored.” Further, in the Anupada Sutta one-pointedness is also said to be present in the first jhāna, coming fifth in a list of constituent factors immediately preceded by[^p88-4] the four familiar jhāna factors.

In the Abhidhamma the status of one-pointedness as a jhāna factor is well-established. The Vibhaṅga, in its chapter on the jhānas, states immediately after the standard jhāna

1 formula: “[First] jhāna: vitakka vicāra pīti sukha cittass’ekaggatā.” The medieval compendium Abhidhammattha Saṅgaha defines the wholesome consciousness of the[^p89-2] first jhāna in exactly the same way. Buddhaghosa too gives commentarial support to this position:

Although the unification of mind is not actually listed among these factors in the (summary) version [beginning] “which is accompanied by application and sustained thought” [Vbh. 245], nevertheless it is mentioned [later] in the Vibhaṅga as follows: “‘jhāna’: it is applied thought, sustained thought, happiness, bliss, unification” [Vbh. 257], and so it is a factor too: for the intention with which the Blessed One gave the summary is the same as that[^p89-3] with which he gave the exposition that follows it.

Thus the suttas, the Abhidhamma, and the commentaries – our three authorities – all support the inclusion of ekaggatā as a jhāna factor. It may be that the prominence of ekaggatā in the attainment of jhāna was so evident that it was felt unnecessary to mention it separately.

A formal definition of ekaggatā in terms of its synonyms is given in the Dhammasaṅgaṇi:

What on that occasion is self-collectedness [one-pointedness] (cittass ’ekaggatā)? The stability, solidity, absorbed steadfastness of thought which on that occasion is the absence of distraction, balance, imperturbed mental procedure, quiet, the faculty and the power of concentration, right concentration – this is[^p89-4] the self-collectedness [one-pointedness] that there then is.

In this definition “stability” ((hiti) indicates the mind’s ability to stand unshaken on its object, an ability present to some degree in every state of consciousness as a requisite for focussing upon a single object. Shwe Zan Aung points out that ekaggatā is in reality

that state of mind which is conscious of one and only one object, because it is not distracted by a plurality of possible objects... It is the fact in (a given state of) consciousness, of having a single point (eka-agga) as object. In other words, it is the germ of all attentive, selective, focussed, or concentrated[^p89-5] consciousness.

As giving this ability ekaggatā is listed among the universal concomitants of[^p90-1] consciousness (sabbacittasādhāra5a).

As a universal mental concomitant, ekaggatā is present in unwholesome consciousness as well as wholesome, but its function there is not strong. It is constantly being undermined by the defilements and hindrances, most notably by restlessness (uddhacca), a mental factor common to all unwholesome states of mind. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā illustrates the difference between unwholesome and wholesome one-pointedness with the following simile:

As by sprinkling a dusty place with water and smoothing it, the dust subsides only for a short time and again resumes its original condition whenever it is dry, so in the immoral portion, one-pointedness of mind is not strong. And as when we sprinkle a place with water poured from pots and dig it up with spades and cement it by beating, pounding and kneading, an image is reflected there as in a burnished glass, and the reflection is true any moment though a hundred years were to pass, so in moral [consciousness], one-pointedness of[^p90-2] mind is strong.

As a jhāna factor one-pointedness is always directed to a wholesome object. It serves to ward off unwholesome influences. In particular it is opposed to the hindrance of sensual desire (kāmacchanda), which it counters and eliminates. As the hindrances are absent in jhāna one-pointedness acquires special strength, based on the previous sustained effort of concentrating the mind. Its stabilizing function is reinforced by the cooperation of the other jhāna factors. In the jhāna consciousness initial thought thrusts the mind upon the object, sustained thought keeps it anchored there, rapture and happiness encourage its interest and satisfaction in the object. The effect is that in jhāna one-pointedness picks up a stabilizing power which cannot be easily overcome by distracting influences. Jhānic one-pointedness is therefore also called the “power of concentration” (samādhibala). It brings the mind to a state of serenity (samatha) which helps mature the other spiritual faculties and acts as a foundation for liberating insight (vipassanā).

One-pointedness is used in the Pāli texts as a synonym for samādhi (concentration). In fact, as we pointed out above, samādhi is defined explicitly in the Visuddhimagga as[^p90-3] wholesome one-pointedness of mind. Buddhaghosa presents the etymology of samādhi in a way which suggests its identity with one-pointedness:

It is the centering (ādhāna) of consciousness and consciousness concomitants evenly (sama.) and rightly (sammā) on a single object; placing is what is meant. So it is the state, in virtue of which consciousness and its concomitants

remain evenly and rightly on a single object undistracted and unscattered, that[^p91-1] should be understood as concentrating.

Concentration is explained as having the characteristic of non-distraction, the function of eliminating distractions, as its manifestation non-wavering. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā gives a somewhat different characterization of concentration. It says that concentration has the characteristic of leadership, the function of welding together the co-existent states as water kneads bath-powder into a paste, peace of mind or knowledge[^p91-2] as its manifestation, and happiness as its proximate cause.

The statement that happiness (sukha) is the proximate cause of concentration (samādhi) alludes to the causal sequence of spiritual development already discussed. In the Sāmaññaphala Sutta the Buddha says that when the yogi sees that the five hindrances are abandoned in him gladness (pāmojja) springs up. Out of gladness rapture (pīti) arises. The body of one filled with rapture becomes tranquil; one whose body is tranquil[^p91-3] experiences happiness; the mind of one who is happy becomes concentrated. Elsewhere the Buddha states that gladness and the remaining factors of the sequence arise in one whose senses are controlled and whose mind is not corrupted by cognizable sense[^p91-4] objects. Again he says that gladness, rapture, tranquility, happiness, and concentration spring up from freedom from remorse (avippa(isāra) which is itself generated by[^p91-5] observing pure principles of conduct (kusalāni sīlāni).

From these passages we see that concentration, the one-pointedness of jhānic intensity, arises out of distinct conditions. Rapture produces calm or tranquility of body and mind, tranquility produces bodily and mental happiness, happiness in turn conduces to gaining complete one-pointedness, the fifth jhāna factor. When excitement is present in the form of the hindrances, one-pointedness is feeble and cannot reach the level of samādhi. But when the excitement of the hindrances subsides, joy and happiness arise leading to a deepening of concentration. This concentration exercises the task of overcoming sensual desire, the most subtle type of excitement.

6 The Buddha declares concentration to be the leader of all (wholesome) dhammas. How this is so the Venerable Nāgasena illustrates with two picturesque similes:

As all the rafters of the roof of a house, O king, go up to the apex, slope towards it, are joined on together at it, and the apex is acknowledged to be the top of all; so is the habit of meditation [samādhi] in its relation to other good qualities.

It is like a king, your Majesty, when he goes down to battle with his army in his fourfold array. The whole army – elephants, cavalry, war chariots and bowmen – would have him as their chief, their lines would incline towards him, lead up to him, they would be so many mountain slopes, one above[^p92-1] another, with him as their summit, round him they would all be ranged.

## An Overview of the First Jhāna

Five mental states have been selected and designated by the Buddha as the factors of the first jhāna, but these five are not the only mental phenomena present in the jhāna. The first jhāna contains a great number of mental phenomena functioning together in unison as coordinate members of the first jhāna state of consciousness. Already in the Anupada Sutta the Buddha praises the analytical perspicacity of the Venerable Sāriputta in contemplating the multitude of factors belonging to the makeup of the jhāna:

And those things which belong to the first meditation [jhāna]: initial thought and sustained thought and rapture and joy and one-pointedness of mind, impingement, feeling, perception, will, thought, desire, determination, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, attention, are uninterruptedly set up by him; known[^p92-2] to him these things arise, known they persist, known they disappear.

In the Abhidhamma literature this list is extended still further with great analytical detail. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi, the primary text of the canonical Abhidhamma, states that on the occasion of the first jhāna consciousness about sixty mental states are present. These represent a smaller number of factors spread out with repetitions over twelve[^p92-2] general categories. The synoptical Abhidhammattha Saṅgaha, reducing this list to its essentials in terms of distinct mental factors, proposes a set of thirty-three concomitants always contained in the first jhāna consciousness. Thirteen are variable factors: seven – contact, feeling, perception, volition, one-pointedness, the life-faculty, and attention – common to all states of consciousness, and six – applied thought, sustained thought, decision, energy, rapture, and desire – general non-universal variables. There are present as well the nineteen beautiful factors (sobhana) which accompany all wholesome mental states: faith, mindfulness, shame, moral dread, non-attachment, non-hatred, equanimity,

tranquility of the (mental) body and the mind, lightness of the (mental) body and the mind, pliancy of the (mental) body and the mind, adaptability of the (mental) body and the mind, proficiency of the (mental) body and the mind, and rectitude of the (mental)[^p93-1] body and the mind. In addition the faculty of wisdom (paññindriya) is always present in jhāna. The two illimitables, compassion (karu5ā) and sympathetic joy (muditā), may also be present individually, thus bringing the total of states possible in the first jhāna[^p93-2] up to thirty-five. The divine abodes (brahmavihāra) of loving kindness (mettā) and equanimity (upekkhā) are covered by the factors of non-hatred and equanimity, of which they represent certain intensifications.

Of all these states only five – vitakka, vicāra, pīti, sukha, and ekaggatā – are called the factors of the first jhāna. The reason is that “when these are arisen jhāna is said to be[^p93-3] arisen.” The jhāna is not something apart from these factors which possesses them but the constellation of these factors themselves:

But just as ‘The army with the four factors’ and ‘music with the five factors’ and ‘The path with the eight factors (eightfold path)’ are stated simply in terms of their factors, so this too should be understood as stated simply in terms of its factors when it is said to have ‘five factors’ or ‘possess five[^p93-4] factors’.

None of the factors, taken in separation from the rest, can constitute the first jhāna. For the jhāna to arise they all must be present together, exercising their special jhānic functions of inhibiting the hindrances opposed to themselves and of bringing the mind into absorption on the object. The five mental phenomena are only jhāna factors by virtue of these special functions. Ordinary vitakka, for example, is not a jhāna factor if it does not counter sloth and torpor. Sloth and torpor and vitakka can co-exist in many ordinary states of consciousness, but when vitakka is being developed towards attaining jhāna it expels and excludes the hindrance of sloth and torpor. Therefore the vitakka in jhāna is of a high quality and specialized function supporting concentration. Similarly for doubt and vicāra. Vicāra can be present in the mind while one is in a state of doubt, but as long as doubt is present vicāra cannot become a jhāna factor. When vicāra is directed to jhāna then it shuts out doubt. The same applies to the other three factors. No matter how strong rapture, happiness, and one-pointedness might become in a mind obsessed by the hindrances, they do not consititute the first jhāna until the hindrances are eliminated.

Each jhāna factor serves as support for the one which succeeds it. Vitakka must apply the mind to the object in order for vicāra to sustain and anchor it there. Vicāra supports

the arising of rapture since it is only when the mind is anchored on the object that it can develop the interest needed for rapture to occur. As rapture grows and matures it brings to maturity happiness. This spiritual happiness, by providing an alternative to the fickle pleasures of the senses, encourages the growth of one-pointedness. Desire for sensual pleasure unsettles the mind, preventing the arising of concentration. As the mind begins to find rapture and happiness in a wholesome meditation object, sensual desire is reduced permitting concentration to become stronger. Even if there is no sensual desire in the mind, one-pointedness would not become strong if there were no happiness. In this way, as Nāgasena has explained, all the other wholesome states incline, slope, and lead towards concentration, which stands at their head like the apex on the roof of a house.

In order for a state of mind to qualify as a first jhāna state of consciousness the five jhānic factors must not only be able to inhibit and occlude the five hindrances, but must also be able to thrust the mind into the object with absorption intensity. If the factors are present only in part, if they are all present but lack sufficient strength to exclude the hindrances, if they can exclude the hindrances but cannot put the mind into absorption, the state of consciousness is not the first jhāna. But when they arise together performing their individual functions in the production of absorption, the first jhāna has arisen complete in its possession of five factors. The Visuddhimagga explains this cooperative endeavor culminating in jhāna thus:

But applied thought directs the mind onto the object; sustained thought keeps it anchored there. Happiness produced by the success of the effort refreshes the mind whose effort has succeeded through not being distracted by those hindrances; and bliss intensifies it for the same reason. Then unification aided by this directing onto, this anchoring, this refreshing and this intensifying, evenly and rightly centers the mind with its remaining associated states on the object, consisting in unity. Consequently possession of five factors should be understood as the arising of these five, namely applied thought, sustained thought, happiness, bliss, and unification of mind. For it is when these are arisen that jhāna is said to be arisen, which is why they are called the five[^p94-1] factors of possession.

## The Jhāna Thought-Process

The commentaries and later analytical treatises of the Theravāda tradition connect the process of jhāna attainment with the account of the cognitive process (cittavīthi) presented in the Abhidhamma. The Abhidhamma analyzes experience into a succession

of discrete, causally connected occasions of consciousness called cittas or citt’uppādas. Each citta endures for only a small fraction of a second yet can still be divided into three stages: a stage of arising (uppāda) when it originates, a stage of duration ((hiti) during which it undergoes transformation, and a stage of dissolution (bha/ga) when it breaks up and ceases, yielding to its immediate successor. Cittas succeed one another with such inconceivable rapidity that it is impossible for an average person to note the distinct mental moments. Experience as we know it is a coarse fusion of a multiplicity of cittas indiscernible in their uniqueness and discreteness.

According to the Abhidhamma philosophy, cittas do not occur in isolation but as parts of a series. These series are of two types. One is the passive stream of consciousness which functions as the underlying “limb of becoming,” the life-continuum (bhava/ga). The second type is the process of active consciousness, by which clear perceptions are made, thoughts and volitions generated, and actions performed. This active process is called the cittavīthi.

The bhava/ga or stream of consciousness is made up of a succession of cittas proceeding through beginningless time. With each new life the bhava/ga springs up in the mother’s womb at the moment of conception (in the case of human or animal life). It is rooted in ignorance (avijjā), supported by the desire to exist (bhavata5hā), and given its specific form and character by the generative kamma of the past. Through the course of a lifetime it continues to function whenever the mind is free from active thought processes. It is most conspicuous in deep sleep, but it also occurs very briefly innumerable times during waking life between occasions of active perception and cognition.

When a sensory datum or idea impinges on the mind, the passive flow of the life continuum is interrupted. The mind then enters a phase of active consciousness, after which it returns to its passive state. The process of jhāna attainment occurs as such an active process of cognition. When the mind has been freed from the hindrances and fully prepared for the attainment of absorption-concentration (appanā-samādhi), the mind which has subsided into the life-continuum is stimulated to break out from it by the force of previous intention. This break consists of three moments. The first is simply the past moment of the life-continuum (atītabhavanga); the second is the vibration of the continuum (bhava/ga calana), caused by the decisive intention; the third is the cutting off or arrest of the passive stream of consciousness (bhava/ga upaccheda), as active consciousness is about to supervene. Immediately after this arrest moment the mind, well-impressed with the counterpart sign of the meditation subject, rises up in active form, adverting to the object and cognizing it through the “mind-door” (manodvāra), i.e., as an object of internal perception.

As the hindrances have been suppressed there arise next four or five moments of javana, i.e., apperceptive consciousness, that are associated with unusually intense vitakka, vicāra, pīti, sukha, and ekaggatā. The first javana in this series is called “the preliminary work” (parikamma), since it prepares the mind for the first jhāna. In the case of a quick-witted meditator, the parikamma moment is skipped over and the series begins with the next moment. The second is called “access” (upacāra) as it brings the

mind to the neighborhood of jhāna. The third, called “conformity” (anuloma), qualifies[^p96-1] the mind further for the jhāna. The fourth is called “change-of-lineage” (gotrabhū), since with this act the stream of consciousness begins to cross over from the sense-sphere plane of consciousness (kāmāvacara) to the fine material plane (rūpāvacara) of jhānic consciousness. Immediately after this the jhāna consciousness arises. On the occasion of initial attainment it lasts for only one great thought-moment with its three phases of arising, duration, and dissolution. Then the jhāna thought passes away and the mind returns to the passive state of the life-continuum, since the first jhāna consciousness is close to the passive continuum.

This process can be made more vivid by the following diagram:

## A B

_______________ _______________________________ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … bh l ch m p u a g jh bh bh bh bh bh bh bh bh

Here line A represents the four great thought moments preceding the jhāna process. This comprises the past stream of consciousness (bh), its vibration (1), its cutting off (ch), and the mind’s advertance to the counterpart sign through the mind-door (m). Line B represents the lapsing of the mind back into the passive stream of consciousness after the jhāna attainment is over. P represents the moment of preliminary work (parikamma), u the moment of access (upacāra), a the moment of conformity (anuloma) during which the mind qualifies itself for jhāna, and g the moment of change-of-lineage where the ordinary stream of consciousness belonging to the sensual sphere is replaced by the lineage of consciousness of the fine material sphere. The following jh represents the first jhāna. After this the mind relapses into the passive stream of consciousness (bhava/ga) which is represented by bh repeated seven times. The groups of three dots in each citta represent the birth (uppāda), transformation or duration ((hiti), and dissolution (bha/ga)[^p96-2] of each thought moment.

It is evident from this diagram that “absorption is only a single conscious moment” 3 (ekacittakkhaṇikā yeva). Unless the meditator masters this attainment by the five ways of mastery to be explained he cannot sustain it. Thus it initially lasts for only one moment before yielding to the life-continuum. But when the yogi has mastered the jhāna, a succession of jhāna cittas will continue on for as long as he determined before entering the attainment. Therefore if we were to represent this situation diagramatically we would find a repetition of jh rather than bh after the first jh in our diagram.

## Perfecting the First Jhāna

The first jhāna is the initial stage of absorption. We have mentioned already that the elevated forms of concentration are divided into two basic levels, access concentration (upacārasamādhi) and absorption concentration (appanāsamādhi). Access concentration is the concentration obtained when the hindrances have been suppressed and the mind has become focussed on the counterpart sign. Absorption concentration is the subsequent concentration which develops when the jhāna factors become manifest in full force, fixing the mind upon the sign to the degree of complete absorption. The difference between access and absorption lies in the relative strength of the jhāna factors. In access the factors are still weak, so that concentration is intermittent. Just as a young child, lifted to its feet, stands for a while and then falls down, the mind in access remains focussed on the sign for a short while and then falls away. In absorption the jhāna factors are strong and fully developed; thus the mind can remain continuously in concentration just as a healthy man can remain standing on his feet for a whole day and[^p97-1] night.

Absorption concentration is the concentration of the four jhānas, and access the concentration immediately preceding entrance upon the jhānas. Once the meditator gains access and the counterpart sign appears to him, he still has to strive to attain absorption. To develop his practice the Visuddhimagga recommends several essential measures, based on the testimony of the ancients. He has to live in a suitable dwelling place, rely upon a suitable alms resort, avoid profitless talk, associate only with spiritually-minded companions, make use only of suitable food, live in a congenial[^p97-2] climate, and maintain his practice in a suitable posture.

Beyond these measures the earnest yogi should rely on the ten kinds of skill in[^p97-3] absorption. The first is “making the basis clean,” which means that he should clean his lodging and his physical body so that they conduce to clear meditation. The second is “balancing the spiritual faculties” (indriyasamattapa(ipādana). Of the five spiritual faculties, faith and wisdom must be balanced with each other, and energy and concentration must also be kept in balance; the fifth faculty, mindfulness, is always useful and has no opposite counterpart. Third, he must be skillful in producing and developing the sign of concentration. Measures four through seven involve exerting the mind (paggaha) on an occasion when it is slack and needs to be exerted, restraining it (niggaha) on an occasion when it is agitated and needs to be restrained, encouraging it (sampaha/sa) when it is restless or dejected and needs encouragement, and looking on at the mind with equanimity (ajjhūpekkhanā) when all is proceeding well and interference is not needed. As an eighth measure the yogi should avoid distracting persons, as a ninth he should approach people experienced in samādhi, and lastly he should be firm in his resolution to achieve concentration.

After attaining the first jhāna a few times the meditator is not advised to set out immediately striving for the second jhāna. This would be a foolish and profitless spiritual ambition. Before he is prepared to make the second jhāna the object of his endeavor he must first bring the first jhāna to perfection. If he is too eager to reach the second jhāna before he has perfected the first he is likely to fail to gain the second jhāna and find himself unable to regain the first. The Buddha compares such a meditator to a foolish cow who, while still unfamiliar with her own pasture, sets out for new pastures. She gets lost in the mountains without gaining food or drink and cannot find her way[^p98-1] back home.

The perfecting of the first jhāna involves two steps of procedure: the extension of the sign and the achievement of the five masteries. The ‘extension of the sign’ (nimittava>>hana) means extending the size of the object of jhāna, that is, the size of the counterpart sign (paṭibhāganimitta). The meditator, before entering jhāna, should mentally determine the boundaries to which he wishes to extend the sign; then he should enter the jhāna and try to bring the sign to reach those boundaries. Beginning with a small area, the size of one or two fingers, he gradually learns to broaden the sign until[^p98-2] the mental image can be made to cover the world-sphere or even beyond.

Following this the meditator should try to acquire five kinds of mastery with respect to the first jhāna. These five masteries (pañca vasiyo) are: mastery in adverting, mastery in[^p98-3] attaining, mastery in resolving, mastery in emerging, and mastery in reviewing. Mastery in adverting is the ability to advert to the jhāna factors one by one after emerging from the first jhāna; the meditator must be able to advert to these factors wherever he wants, whenever he wants, and for as long as he wants. Mastery in attaining is the ability to enter upon jhāna quickly. Mastery in resolving is the ability to remain in the jhāna for exactly the pre-determined length of time. Mastery in emerging is the ability to emerge from the jhāna quickly, without difficulty. Mastery in reviewing is mastery in reviewing the jhāna and its factors by means of retrospective knowledge (paccavekkhanañā5a) immediately after adverting to them. When the yogi has achieved this fivefold mastery, then he is ready to strive for the second jhāna.

[^p68-1]: For the formula, see Chapter III, p. 52.
[^p69-1]: “Balavatara takkassa etaJ nāmaJ.” Dhs.A., p. 187.
[^p69-2]: “Idha Ānanda Tathāgatassa viditā vedanā uppajjanti, viditā upa::hahanti, viditā abbhattaJ gacchanti; viditā saññā, viditā vitakkā uppajjanti. viditā upa::hahanti, viditā abbhattaJ gacchanti.” MN. 3:124.
[^p69-3]: “YaJ vedeti taJ sañjānāti, yaJ sañjānāti taJ vitakketi, yaJ vitakketi taJ papañceti.” MN. 1:111-12.
[^p69-4]: Pubbe kho āvuso vitakketvā vicāretvā pacchā vācaJ bhindati. Tasmā vitakka vicārā vacīsaKkhāro.” MN. 1:301.
[^p69-5]: “VācaJ saKkharoti karoti nibbatteti ti vacisaKkhāro.” MN.A. 2:263.
[^p70-1]: “Na hi taJ vitakka vicārarahitacittaJ vacighosaJ nibbattetuJ sakkoti.” Dhammapāla, [Majjhima Nikāya)īka] [vols. 1-2] Mulapa55āsa (īkā; [vol. 3:] Majjimapa55āsa (īkā… Uparipa55āsa (īkā. [Pāli Text in Burmese script].3 vols. (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1960-61], 2:383 (hereafter cited as MN.T.).
[^p70-2]: I. B. Horner, trans. The Book of the Discipline (Vinaya-Piṭaka), Vols. 1-3: (Suttavibhanga), vol. 4: (Mahāvagga), vol. 5: (Cullavagga), vol. 6: (Parivāra), [Sacred Books of the Buddhists Series, vols. 10-11, 13-14, 20, 25],6 vols. (London: Luzac & Co., 1951-72), 4:6 (hereafter cited as BD.). “Atha kho bhagavato rahogatassa patisallīnassa evaJ cetaso parivitakko udapādi.” Vinp. 1:4.
[^p70-3]: AN. 1:189.
[^p70-4]: AN. 5:385.
[^p71-1]: MN. 3:73.
[^p71-2]: Psy. Ethics, pp. 10-11. “Yo tasmim samaye takko vitakko, saJkappo, appanā, byappanā, cetaso abhiniropanā, sammā saJkappo, ayaJ tasmiJ samaye vitakko hoti.” Dhs., p. 18.
[^p71-3]: Expositor, 1:189. “Balavatara takkassetaJ nāmaJ. Su::hu kappanavasena saJkappo. EkaggaJ cittaJ ārammaLe appetīti appanā. DutiyapadaJ upasaggavasena vaYYhitaJ. Balavatarā vā appanā byappanā. ĀrammaLe cittaJ abhiniropeti cetaso abhiniropanā. Yathāvatāya niyyānikatāya ca kusalabhāvappatto pasattho saJkappoti sammāsamkappo.” Dhs.A., p. 187.
[^p71-4]: Expositor, 1:151. “SvāyaJ ārammaLe cittassa abhiniropanalakkhaLo. So hi ārammaLe cittaJ āropeti. Yathā hi koci rājavallabhaJ ñātiJ vā mittaJ vā nissāya rājagehaJ ārohati. EvaJ vitakkaJ nissāya cittaJ ārammaLaJ ārohati.” Dhs.A., p. 157.
[^p72-1]: Anuruddha, Compendium of Philosophy, Being a Translation Now made for the First Time from the 0riginal Pali of the Abhidhammattha Sa5gaha. Translated with Introductory Notes and essay by Shwe Zan Aung. Revised and edited by Mrs. Rhys Davids (Pali Text Society Translation Series, vol. 2; London: H. Frowde, 1910-63), p.238 (hereafter cited as Compendium).
[^p72-2]: MN.A. 4:93.
[^p72-3]: MN.T. 3:307.
[^p73-1]: MN. 1:115-18.
[^p73-2]: Ibid.
[^p73-3]: MLS. 2:226. “Ime ca,:hapati, akusalasaJkappā kiJ samu::hānā? Samu::hānā pi nesaJ vuttaJ. Saññāsamu::hānā ti’ssa vacanīyaJ. Katamā saññā? Saññā pi hi bahu anekavidhā nānappakārikā, kāmasaññā byāpādasaññā vihiJsā saññā; itosamu::hānā akusalasaJkappā.” MN. 2:27.
[^p74-1]: KS. 2:105-106. SN. 2:150-51.
[^p74-2]: MLS. 1:15. “… pa:isamkhā yoniso uppannaJ kāmavitakkaJ nādhivāseti pajahati vinodeti byantikaroti anabhāvam gameti,… byāpādavitakkaJ…, vihiJsāvitakkaJ… uppannuppanne pāpake akusale dhamme nādhivāseti pajahati vinodeti byantikaroti anabhāvaJ gameti.” MN. 1:11.
[^p74-3]: KS. 2:106. SN. 2:152.
[^p74-4]: GS. 1:232. “Ñātivitakko janapada vitakko anavaññatti pa:isaJyutto vitakko.” AN. 3:254.
[^p74-5]: MN. 2:27.
[^p75-1]: MLS. 1:150. MN. 1:116.
[^p75-2]: MLS. 2:227. MN. 2:27.
[^p75-3]: KS. 2:106. SN. 2:151-52.
[^p76-1]: Soma Thera, Comp. trans. and ed., The Removal of Distracting Thoughts, Vitakka-Sa5(hāna Sutta. A Discourse of the Buddha (Majjhima-Nikāya No. 20). (Kandy, Ceylon: Buddhist Publication Society, 1960), p. 1. “Seyyathāpi bhikkhave dakkho palagaLYo vā palagaLYantevāsī vā sukhumāya āLiyā olārikaJ āLiJ abhinīhaneyya, abhinivajjeyya – evaJ eva kho bhikkhave bhikkhuno yaJ nimittaJ āgamma yaJ nimittaJ manasikaroto uppajjanti pāpakā akusalā vitakkā chandūpasaJhitā pi, dosūpasaJhitā pi mohūpasaJhitā pi, tena bhikkhave bhikkhunā tamhā nimittā aññaJ nimittaJ manasikātabbaJ kusalūpasaJhitaJ; tassa tamhā nimittā aññaJ nimittaJ manasikaroto kusalūpasaJhitaJ ye pāpakā akusalā vitakkā chandūpasaJhitā… te pahīyanti te abbhatthaJ gacchanti, tesaJ pahānā ajjhattaJ eva cittaJ santi::hati sannisīdati ekodi hoti samādhiyati.” MN. 1:119.
[^p76-2]: Ibid. 119ff.
[^p76-3]: Reflection on materiality (dhātumanasikāra) means the reflection on the elements of which all tangible objects are made. When one reflects on the basic material elements one would realize that no one particular element is responsible for the cause of his anger. This realization helps him eliminate hatred toward material objects.
[^p76-4]: PP., p. 148. “Āhanana-pariyāhananaraso, tathā hi tena yogāvacaro ārammaLaJ vitakkāhataJ vitakkapariyāhataJ karotī ti vuccati.” Vism., p. 114.
[^p77-1]: “AppanālakkhaLo mahārāja vitakko. Yathā mahārāja vaYYhakī suparikammakataJ dāruJ sandhismiJ appeti, evaJ kho mahārāja appanālakkhaLo vitakkho’ti” V. Trenckner, ed. The Milindapañho, Being Dialogues Between King Milinda and the Buddhist Sage Nagasena (Pali Text Society Publication Series no. 69; London: Luzac & Co., for the Pali Text Society, 1880-1962), p.62 (hereafter cited as Milp.).
[^p77-2]: Compendium, p. 57.
[^p77-3]: Ibid.
[^p77-4]: PP., p. 130. Vism., pp. 101-102.
[^p77-5]: PP., p. 130. Vism., pp. 101-102.
[^p78-1]: PP., p. 130. “Uggahanimitte kasiLadoso paññāyati. Pa:ibhāganimittaJ, thavikato nihatādāsamaLYalaJ viya, suddhotasaKkhathalaJ viya, valāhakantarā nikkhantacandamaLYalaJ viya, meghamukhe balākā viya, uggahanimittaJ padāletvā nikkhantaJ iva tato sataguLaJ sahassaguLaJ suparisuddhaJ hutvā upa::hāti. TaJ ca kho pana n’eva vaõõavantaJ, na saL:hānavantaJ. Yadi hi taJ īdisaJ bhaveyya, cakkhuviññeyyaJ siyā oXārikaJ sammasanūpagaJ tilakkhaLabhāhataJ. Na pan’etaJ tādisaJ. KevalaJ hi samādhilābhino upa::hānākāramattaJ saññājaJ etan ti.” Vism., p. 102.
[^p79-1]: MLS. 3:116. “Katamo ca, bhikkhave, sammāsaJkappo sāsavo puññabhāgiyo upadhivepakko? NekkhammasaJkappo, avyāpādasaJkappo avihiJsāsaJkappo – ayaJ, bhikkhave sammāsaJkappo sāsavo puññaabhāgiyo upadhivepakko. Katamo ca bhikkhave, sammāsaJkappo ariyo anāsavo lokuttaro maggaKgo? Yo kho, bhikkhave, ariyacittassa anāsavacittassa ariyamaggassa samaKgino ariyamaggaJ bhāvayato takko vitakko saJkappo appanā vyappanā cetaso abhiniropanā vācīsaJkharo, ayaJ bhikkhave sammāsaJkappo ariyo anāsavo lokuttaro maggaKgo.” MN. 3:73.
[^p80-1]: Psy. Ethics, p. 11. “Yo tasmiJ samaye cāro vicāro anuvicāro upavicāro cittassa anusandhānatā anupekk- hanatā. AyaJ tasmiJ samaye vicāro hoti.” Dhs., p. 18.
[^p80-2]: PP., p. 148. Vism., p. 114. “VicaraLaJ va vicāro. AnusañcaranaLti vuttaJ hoti. SvāyaJ ārammaLānu- majjanalakkhaLo. Tatha sahajatānuyojana raso. Cittassa anuppabandhapaccupa::hāno.” Dhs.A., p. 158.
[^p80-3]: Compendium, p. 17.
[^p80-4]: Ibid., p. 40.
[^p80-5]: PP., p. 148. “Sante pi ca nesaJ katthaci avippayoge, oXārika::hena pubbaKgama::hena ca ghaL:ābhighāto viya cetaso pa:hamābhinipāto vitakko; sukhuma::hena anumajjanasabhāvena ca ghaL:ānuravo viya anuppabandho vicāro.” Vism., p. 115.
[^p81-1]: Ibid.
[^p81-2]: GS. 5:5. AN. 5:4-5.
[^p81-3]: KS. 2:26-27. SN. 2:30
[^p81-4]: Dial. 1:84. DN. 1:73.
[^p82-1]: Psy. Ethics, p. 12. “Katamā tasmiJ samaye pīti hoti? Yā tasmiJ samaye pīti pāmojjaJ āmodanā pamodanā hāso pahāso vitti odagyaJ attamanatā cittassa; ayaJ tasmiJ samaye pīti hoti.” Dhs., p. 18.
[^p82-2]: PP., p. 149. “PītisukhaJ ti ettha pīnayati ti piti. Sā saJpiyāyanalakkhanā; kāyacittapīnanarasā, pharaLarasā vā; odagyapaccupa::hānā.” Vism., P. 115.
[^p82-3]: Compendium, p. 243.
[^p82-4]: “ĀrammaLaJ kallato gahana lakkhaLā ti vuttaJ.” Three)ikas, p. 75. [quoted in Compendium, p. 243].
[^p82-5]: PP., p. 149. Vism., pp. 115-16. Dhs.A., p. 158.
[^p83-1]: PP., pp 149-50. Vism., p. 116. Dhs.A., pp. 158-59.
[^p83-2]: Ibid.
[^p83-3]: PP., p. 150. “Sā pan’esā pañcavidhā pīti gabbhaJ gaLhantī paripākaJ gacchantī duvidhaJ passaddhiJ paripūreti, kāyapassaddhiJ ca cittapassaddhiJ ca. Passaddhi gabbhaJ gaLhantī paripākaJ gacchantī duvidhaJ pi sukhaJ paripūreti, kāyikaJ ca cetasikaJ ca. SukhaJ gabbhaJ gaLhantaJ paripākaJ gacchantaJ tividhaJ samādhiJ paripūreti, khaLikasamādhiJ, upacāra samādhiJ, appanāsamādhiJ ti.” Vism., p. 117.
[^p83-4]: Expositor, 1:154. “PharaLa pītiyā pana uppannāya sakala sarīraJ dhamitvā pūritava::i viya mahatā udakoghena pakkhandappatakucchi viya ca anuparipphātaJ hoti.” Dhs.A., p. 160.
[^p83-5]: PP., p. 151. “Tāsu yā appaLā samādhissa mūlaJ hutvā vaYYhamānā samādhisampayogamgatā pharaLa pīti, ayaJ imasmiJ atthe adhippetā pītī ti.” Vism., p. 117.
[^p84-1]: Expositor, 1:52-53. Dhs.A., pp. 160-61.
[^p84-2]: Ambalangoda Polvatte Buddhadatta Mahathera, trans. and ed., Dhammapadam: An Anthology of Sayings of the Buddha. (Colombo, Sri Lanka: Apothecaries Co., n.d.), v.104 (hereafter cited as Dhp.).
[^p84-3]: SN. 3:69.
[^p84-4]: AN. 4:89.
[^p84-5]: SN. 1:5,200.
[^p84-6]: AN. 4:382.
[^p84-7]: Dhp., vs. 203,204.
[^p84-8]: “Tattha katamaJ sukhaJ? YaJ cetasikaJ sukhaJ cetosamphassajaJ sukhaJ vedayitaJ cetosam- phassajā sātā sukhā vedanā.” Vibh., pp. 83-84.
[^p84-9]: PP., p. 151. Vism., p. 117.
[^p85-1]: Expositor, l:145f. Dhs.A. pp. 83-84.
[^p85-2]: MN. 3:242-43.
[^p85-3]: SN. 2:3.
[^p85-4]: MN. 1:398-400.
[^p85-5]: Narada, Manual, pp. 143ff.
[^p85-6]: AN. 1:80-81.
[^p86-1]: “Pāmojjūpanisā pīti; pītūpanisā passaddhi; passaddhūpanisaJ sukhaJ; sukhūpaniso samādhi.” SN. 2:30.
[^p86-2]: “Appanāya pubbabhāgasukhaJ.” Buddhaghosa, [Saṃyutta Nikāya Aṭṭhakathā] Sāratthappakāsinī Nāma Saṃyuttaṭṭhakathā, [Pāli Text in Burmese script],3 vols. (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1957), 2:50 (hereafter cited as SN.A.).
[^p86-3]: “UpacārajjhānasahitasukhaJ.” Dhammapāla, [Saṃyutta Nikāya Tīka] Saṃyutta(ikā (Pāli Text in Burmese script]2 vols. (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasānana Samiti, 1961), 2:65 (hereafter cited as SN.T.).
[^p86-4]: “Yattha pīti tattha sukhaJ yattha sukhaJ tattha na niyamato pīti.” Vism., p. 117. Dhs.A., p. 160.
[^p87-1]: Expositor, 1:155-56. Dhs.A., pp. 160-61.
[^p87-2]: “Te imasmiJ viveke jātā honti, sañjātā nibbattā, abhinibbattā, pātubhūtā. Tena vuccati vivekajanti.” Vibh., p. 267.
[^p87-3]: GS. 3:17-18. “So imaJ eva kāyaJ vivekajena pītisukhena abhisandeti parisandeti paripureti parippharati, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa vivekajena pītisukhena apphu:aJ hoti. Seyyathāpi bhikkhave dakkho nahāpako vā nahāpakantevāsī vā kaJsathāle nahāniya cuLLāni okiritvā udakena paripphosakaJ paripphosakaJ sanneyya, sā’ssa nahāniya piLYi snehānugatā snehaparetā sāntarabāhirā phutā snehena na ca paggharati, evaJ eva kho bhikkhave bhikkhu imaJ eva kāyaJ vivekajena pīti sukhena abhisandeti parisandeti paripūreti parippharati, nāssa kiñci sabbāvato kāyassa vivekajena pītisukhena apphu:aJ hoti.” AN. 3:25. DN. 1:74.
[^p88-1]: “Yathāyathā kammajarūpaJ tathā tathā cittajarūpassa abhibyāpanato, tenāha ’upādinnakasantatī’ti ādi.” Dhammapāla, [Dīgha Nikāya)īkā]. [Vol. 1:] Sīlakkhandhavagga(īkā [vol. 2:1 Mahāvagga(īkā; [vol. 3:] Pāthikavagga(īkā, [Pāli Text in Burmese script].3 vols. (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1960-61), 1:263 (hereafter cited as DN.T.).
[^p88-2]: Vism., pp. 526-29. Nārada, Manual, p. 302.
[^p88-3]: MLS. 1:354. “Pa:hamaJ kho āvuso jhānaJ pañcangikaJ: Idh’āvuso paṭhamaJ jhānaJ samāpannassa bhikkhuno vitakko ca vattati vicāro ca pīti ca sukhaK ca cittekaggatā ca. Pa:hamaJ kho āvuso jhānaJ evaJ pañcangikaJ ti.” MN. 1:294.
[^p88-4]: See below, p. 153.
[^p89-1]: Vibh., p. 274.
[^p89-2]: Nārada, Manual, p. 42.
[^p89-3]: PP., p. 153. “Tattha cittekaggatā kiñcāpi, savitakkaJ savicāraJ ti imasmiJ pā:he na niddi::hā, tathāpi VibbaKge ’Jhānanti vitakko vicāro pīti sukhaJ cittekaggatā’ti [Vbh. 257] evam vuttattā aKgaJ eva. Yena hi adhippāyena Bhagavatā uddeso kato, so yeva tena VibhaKge pakāsito ti.” Vism., p. 119.
[^p89-4]: Psy. Ethics, pp. 13-14. “Katama tasmiJ samaye cittassekaggatā hoti? Yā tasmiJ samaye cittassa:hiti, san:hiti ava:hiti avisāhāro, avikkhepo avisāhatamānasā samatho samādhindriyaJ samādhibalaJ sammā samādhi, ayaJ tasmiJ samaye cittassekaggatā hoti.” Dhs., p. 19.
[^p89-5]: Compendium, p. 241.
[^p90-1]: Narada, Manual, p. 77.
[^p90-2]: Expositor, 1:190. “Yathā hi raju::hāna::hāne udakena sincitvā sammatthe thokameva kālaJ rajo sannisī- dati. Sukkhante sukkhante puna pakatibhāvena vu::hāti. EvaJ eva akusalapakkhe cittekaggatā na balavatī hoti. Yathā pana tasmiJ:hāne gha:ehi udakaJ āsiñcitvā kudālena khaLitvā āko:anamaddanagha:hanāni katvā upalitta ādāse viya chāyā paññāyati. Vassasatātikkamepi tammuhuttakaJ viya hoti. EvaJ eva kusalapakkhe cittekaggatā balavatī hoti.” Dhs.A., p. 188.
[^p90-3]: PP., p. 84. “Kusalacittass’ekaggatā.” Vism., p. 68.
[^p91-1]: PP., p. 85. “EkārammaLe citta cetasikānaJ samaJ sammā ca ādhānaJ;:hapanaJti vuttaJ hoti, tasmā yassa dhammassānubhāvena ekārammaLe cittacetasikā samaJ sammā ca avikkhepamānā avippakiLLā ca hutvā ti::hanti, idaJ samādhānanti veditabbaJ.” Vism., p. 68.
[^p91-2]: Expositor, 1:157. Dhs.A., pp. 161-62.
[^p91-3]: DN. 1:73.
[^p91-4]: SN. 4:78.
[^p91-5]: AN. 4:107.
[^p91-6]: AN. 4:107.
[^p92-1]: T. W. Rhys Davids, trans. and ed., The Questions of King Milinda. (The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 25; Oxford: At the Clarendon Press, 1890), pp. 60-61 (hereafter cited as QKM.). “Yathā Mahārāja kū:āgārassa yā kāci gopānasīso sabbe te kū:aJgamā honti kū:a ninnā, kū:asamosaraLā, kūtaJ tāsaJ aggaJ-akkhāyati, evaJ eva kho mahārāja yekeci kusaladhammā sabbe te samādhi pamukhā honti samādhi ninnā, samādhi ponā samādhi pabbhārāti. Yathā mahārāja, koci rājā caturaKginī senāya saddhiJ saKgāmaJ otareyya, sabbā va senā, hatthī ca assā ca rathā ca pattī ca tappamukhā bhaveyyuJ tanninnā, tapponā tappabbhārā, taJ yeva anupariyāyeyyuJ, evaJ eva kho mahārāja, ye keci kusaladhammā sabbe te samādhi pamukhā samādhi ninnā samādhi ponā samādhi pabbhārā.” Milp., pp. 38-39.
[^p92-2]: MLS. 3:78. “Ye ca paṭhamajjhāne dhammā vitakko ca vicāro ca pīti ca sukhaJ ca cittekaggatā ca phasso vedanā saññā cetanā cittaJ chando adhimokkho viriyaJ sati upekkhā manasikāro, tyāssa dhammā anupadavavatthitā honti, tyāssa dhammā viditā uppajjanti, viditā upa::hahanti, viditā abbhatthaJ gacchanti.” MN. 3:25.
[^p93-1]: Narada. Manual pp. 77-78. “Phasso, vedanā, saññā, cetanā, ekaggatā, jīvitindriyaJ, manasikāro, vitakko, vicāro, adhimokkho, viriyaJ, pīti, chando; saddhā, sati, hiri, ottappaJ, alobho, adoso, tatramajj- hattatā, kāyapassaddhi, cittapassaddhi, kāyalahutā, cittalahutā, kāyamudutā. cittamudutā, kāyakamma- ññatā, cittakammaññatā, kāyapāguññatā, cittapāguññatā, kāyujjukatā, cittujjukatā.” Ibid., p. 78.
[^p93-2]: Ibid., pp. 131-32.
[^p93-3]: PP., p. 152. Vism., p. 118.
[^p93-4]: PP., p. 152-53. Vism., p. 118.
[^p94-1]: PP., p. 152. “Yasmā pana vitakko ārammaLe cittaJ abhiniropeti, vicāro anuppabandhati, tehi avikkhepāya sampāditapayogassa cetaso payogasampattisambhavā pīti pīLanaJ, sukhaJ ca upabrūhanaJ karoti, atha naJ sāsesasampayuttadhammaJ etehi abhiniropanānuppabandhanapīLanānūpabrūhanehi anuggahitā ekaggatā ekattārammaLe samaJ sammā ca ādhiyati, tasmā vitakko, vicāro, pīti, sukhaJ, cittekaggatā ti imesaJ pañcannaJ uppattivasena pañcaKgasamannāgatatā veditabbā. Uppannesu hi etesu pañcasu jhānaJ uppannaJ nāma hoti. Ten’assa etāni pañca samannāgataKgāni ti vuccanti.” Vism., p. ll8.
[^p96-1]: The DakkhināvibhaKga Sutta (MN. # 142) uses “gotrabhū” to mean a bhikkhu only by name. Also see MN.A. 4:225.
[^p96-2]: For an account of jhāna in relation to the cittavīthi see Nārada, Manual, pp. 214-19; Vism. pp. 111-12; Compendium pp. 54-55.
[^p96-3]: PP., p. 144. Vism., p. 112.
[^p97-1]: PP., p. 131. Vism., p. 102.
[^p97-2]: PP., pp. 132-34. Vism., pp. 103-104.
[^p97-3]: PP., pp. 134-40. Vism., pp. 104-110.
[^p98-1]: AN. 4:418-19.
[^p98-2]: PP., pp. 158-59. Vism., p. 123.
[^p98-3]: The five are, respectively: Āvajjanavasi, samāpajjanavasi, adhitthānavasi, vu((hānavasi, and paccavekkhanavasi. For a discussion see Vism., pp. 124-25. PP., pp. 160-61. The canonical source is the Pts., pp. 96-97.
