## BEYOND THE FOUR JHÀNAS

Following the attainment of the fourth jhāna there are several options open to a meditator. These can be grouped together into three basic categories. One is the attainment of the four āruppas, immaterial jhānas involving further concentration and refinement of mental serenity. A second – which as we will see generally presupposes the immaterial jhānas as prerequisites – is the development of the abhiññās, higher faculties of knowledge, in some cases issuing in supernormal powers. A third alternative is the cultivation of wisdom through insight into the nature of phenomena, which brings the destruction of the defilements and results in emancipation from saṃsāra. In the present chapter we will explore the first and second of these three alternatives, closing with some remarks concerning the relationship between jhānas and rebirth. Then in the next two chapters we will examine the place of jhāna in the development of wisdom leading to final deliverance.

Throughout the following discussion it should be borne in mind that the attainment of the immaterial jhānas and the exercise of supernormal powers are not essential to achieving the ultimate Buddhist goal, the realization of nibbāna. What is essential is the practice of the Noble Eightfold Path, which does not necessarily include the āruppas and abhiññās. However, because these latter two sets of practices can contribute to the growth of calm and insight and embellish the spiritual perfection of a yogin, the Buddha included them in his discipline. There they have remained as options open for meditators inclined to develop them.

## The Four Immaterial Jhānas

Beyond the four jhānas lie four higher attainments in the scale of mental unification. These attainments are collectively known as the four formless or immaterial jhānas (arūpajjhānas); the lower four attainments come to be called, in contrast, the four fine material jhānas (rūpajjhānas) or simply the four jhānas. The immaterial jhānas are individually designated, not by numerical names like their predecessors, but by the names of their objective spheres: the base of boundless space, the base of boundless consciousness, the base of nothingness, and the base of neither perception nor[^p129-1] non-perception. They receive the designation “formless” or “immaterial” for two reasons: [1] because they are achieved by surmounting all perceptions of material form (rūpa), even of the subtle material form of the counterpart sign which serves as the object for the fine material jhānas; and [2] because they are the subjective counterparts of the immaterial planes of existence.

The terms rūpajjhāna and arūpajjhāna, fine material jhāna and immaterial jhāna, do not appear in the main nikāyas of the Suttapi:aka. The terms rūpāvacara. jhāna. and arūpāvacara. jhāna., “fine material sphere jhāna” and “immaterial sphere jhāna,”[^p130-1] appear occasionally in the Abhidhammapi:aka, but it is not until the period of the commentaries that such names became common. In the suttas the formless attainments are referred to sometimes by the collective name āruppa “immaterial states,” or as the[^p130-2] cattāro āruppā, “the four immaterial states.” They are also called “peaceful emancipa[^p130-3] tions, transcending material form, immaterial” (Wr. tr.) or simply “peaceful abodes”. Most often they are merely enumerated in their order of attainment without being brought together under any group label.

Before turning to consider the immaterial jhānas individually, some important remarks are called for concerning their “internal constitution.” We saw in the previous chapter that the movement from any lower jhāna to its successor involves the elimination of the coarser jhāna factors. The refinement of consciousness that occurs through this movement thus hinges upon actual changes being effected in the composition of the states of consciousness corresponding to the jhānas. However, in ascending from the fourth fine material jhāna to the first immaterial jhāna, and then from one immaterial jhāna to another, no changes in the compositional factors of consciousness are required. In other words, the fourth fine material jhāna and all four formless attainments have precisely the same kinds of factors entering into their internal constitution. The factors in each higher attainment are subtler than those in its predecessors, more peaceful and more sublime, but they do not differ in number or in their essential nature. The climb from one formless attainment to another is brought about by changing the object of concentration, not by eliminating or replacing component factors. For this reason the treatises of the Abhidhammapi:aka, such as the Dhammasaṅgaṇi and the Vibhaṅga, treat the four āruppas as modes of the fourth jhāna, combining the formula for each with the[^p130-4] general formula for the fourth jhāna. All five states – the fourth fine material jhāna and the four immaterial jhānas – contain the same basic constellation of mental concomitants (cetasikas) and the same two jhāna factors, namely one-pointedness and neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling. Thence from the standpoint of the Abhidhamma, which defines a class of consciousness (citta) by its components, the four types of consciousness belonging to the four formless attainments are modes of the fourth jhāna consciousness according to the fourfold scheme, and of the fifth jhāna consciousness according to the fivefold scheme.

The First Āruppa: The Base of Boundless Space The four formless attainments must be achieved in the order in which they are presented in the texts – that is, beginning with the base of boundless space and culminating in the

base of neither perception nor non-perception. The motivation which initially leads a yogin to seek the immaterial states is a clear perception of the dangers posed by gross physical matter. As it is said in the Majjhima Nikāya:

It is in virtue of matter that wielding of sticks, wielding of knives, quarrels, brawls and disputes take place; but that does not exist at all in the immaterial state, and in this expectation he enters upon the way of dispassion for only[^p131-1] material things, for the fading and cessation of only those.

He might also become repelled by matter as a result of considering the multitude of afflictions to which the physical body is vulnerable, such as eye diseases, ear diseases, and so forth. Aspiring to escape from these dangers connected with material form, the meditator must first attain the four jhānas of the fine material sphere. He then enters the[^p131-2] fourth jhāna, taking as his object any of the kasi5as except the limited space kasi5a. The limited space kasi5a is unsuitable because it does not allow for a separation between the kasi5a itself and the space it covers, a separation, we will see, necessary for reaching the first formless jhāna.

By achieving the fourth fine material jhāna the meditator has risen above gross matter but still has not completely transcended all material form. The reason is that the self-luminous counterpart sign, the object of his jhāna, is a subtle type of material form. To reach the formless attainments he must desire to surmount as well the materiality of the kasi5a. Such a desire can be induced by contemplating the kasi5a materiality as the counterpart of gross matter sharing to some extent its defects. Buddhaghosa illustrates how this is done by means of a simile. If a timid man is pursued by a snake in the forest he will flee from it as fast as he can. If he should later see something resembling the snake, such as a palm leaf with a streak painted on it, a creeper, a rope, or a crack in the ground, he would become fearful and anxious and would not want to look at it. The time the meditator was frightened by seeing the danger in gross matter is like the time the man saw the snake. When the meditator escapes gross matter by reaching the fourth jhāna, this is like the time the man flees from the snake. The time the meditator observes the subtle matter of the kasi5a to be the counterpart of gross matter and wants to surmount it is like the time the man sees the object resembling a snake and is afraid to[^p131-3] look at it.

Once he has generated a strong desire to reach the immaterial jhānas the meditator must achieve the fivefold mastery over the fourth jhāna. Then, after emerging from the fourth jhāna, he perceives the dangers in the jhāna and the benefits in the higher attainment. The dangers are: [1] that the fourth jhāna has an object consisting in material form and hence is still connected with gross physical matter; [2] that it is close to happiness, a factor of the third jhāna: and [3] that it is grosser than the immaterial attainments. On

the other hand, the meditator sees the base of boundless space as more peaceful and sublime than the fourth jhāna and as more safely removed from materiality. However, there is no effort to eliminate jhāna factors, as both the fourth fine material jhāna and[^p132-1] the four immaterial jhānas have the same two factors, as we mentioned.

By reflecting on its dangers the meditator ends his attachment to the fourth jhāna; he then sets out to reach the base of boundless space. The method for attaining this first formless jhāna is to mentally extend the kasi5a “to the limit of the world-sphere, or as far as he likes,” and then to remove the kasi5a by attending exclusively to the space it[^p132-2] covered without adverting to the kasi5a.

The original kasi5a which provided the preliminary sign (parikammanimitta) for concentration was, as we saw, a disc-like object, in the case of the earth kasi5a a disc filled with reddish-brown clay. When practising preliminary concentration the meditator kept focussing his mind upon this disc until there appeared the learning sign (uggahanimitta), i.e. a mental image apprehended as clearly as the physical object. Concentration on the learning sign gave rise to the counterpart sign (paṭibhāganimitta), the conceptualized image used as the object for access concentration and the fine material jhānas. After entering each jhāna, the meditator learned to extend the sign outwards by degrees, making the visualized kasi5a cover increasingly larger areas up to a world-system or more. Now, to reach the base of boundless space, the meditator must remove the kasi5a by attending exclusively to the space it has been made to cover without attending to the kasi5a:

When he is removing it, he neither folds it up like a mat nor withdraws it like a cake from a tin. It is simply that he does not advert to it or give attention to it or review it; it is when he neither adverts to it nor gives attention to it nor reviews it but gives his attention exclusively to the space touched by it 3 [regarding that] as ‘Space, space’, that he is said to ‘remove the kasina’.

Taking as his object the space left after the removal of the kasi5a, the yogin adverts to it as “boundless space, boundless space,” or simply as “space, space,” striking at it with applied and sustained thought. He cultivates this practice again and again, repeatedly developing it until the concept reaches maturity. When his development is fully matured, then the consciousness pertaining to the base of boundless space arises with boundless space as its object. It is the first wholesome consciousness of the immaterial sphere, and appears in the cognitive series in the same place that the first jhāna appeared in its own thought-process. In the prior moments of the series, the three or four moments of access concentration are always associated with equanimous feeling and pertain to the sense sphere; the fourth or fifth moment, the moment of absorption, pertains to the imaterial[^p132-4] sphere.

The standard formula for the base of boundless space, as presented in the suttas, is as follows:

With the complete surmounting of perceptions of matter, with the disappearance of perceptions of resistance, with non-attention to perceptions of variety [aware of] ‘unbounded space’, he enters upon and dwells in the base[^p133-1] consisting of boundless space.

There are four phrases in this formula worth discussing separately:

1. with the complete surmounting of perceptions of matter (sabbaso rūpasaññāna. samatikkamā); 2. with the disappearance of perceptions of resistance (pa(igha saññāna. atthagamā); 3. with non-attention to perceptions of variety (nānattasaññāna. amanasikārā); and 4. unbounded space (ananto ākāso).

Now we will treat each of these phrases in turn.

1. “With the complete surmounting of perceptions of matter” (sabbaso rupasaññāna. samatikkamā)

The phrase “perceptions of matter”, according to the commentaries, means both the fine-material jhānas and their objects, the kasi5as. The Vibhaṅga explains “perceptions of matter” as

… the perception, perceiving, perceivedness, in one who has attained a fine-material-sphere attainment or in one who has been reborn there or in one[^p133-2] who is abiding in bliss there in this present life.

Thus the Vibhaṅga identifies the term with the jhānas. But the commentary holds that the object should also be understood to be included, since the attainment of the first[^p133-3] immaterial jhāna requires that the subtle material form of the kasi5as be relinquished. We saw that in developing the fine-material jhānas the meditator began with a coarse physical object, shifted his focus to the subtle form of the counter-part sign, and ascended from the first to the fourth jhāna by abandoning various mental factors while retaining the same object. But now he must give up, not only the perceptions of material form belonging to the four jhānas, but also the object of these perceptions – the fine material form of the counterpart sign – since it is impossible to attain the base of boundless space without overcoming all perceptions of material form.

2. “With the disappearance of perceptions of resistance” (pa(ighasaññāna. atthagamā)

The word pa(igha, which we translate here as “resistance,” generally signifies aversion, repugnance, or anger. Here, however, it is used to mean sensory impact, the striking (gha = han) against one another (pa(i) of the sense organs and their respective sense objects. Perceptions of resistance are thus sensory perceptions. As it is said in the Vibhaṅga:

Here, what are perceptions of resistance? Perceptions of visible objects, perceptions of sounds, perceptions of odours, perceptions of flavours,[^p134-1] perceptions of tangible objects – these are called ‘perceptions of resistance’.

The commentaries elucidate this as the non-occurrence of any of the ten types of sense consciousness, five the result of wholesome kamma and five the result of unwholesome kamma:

… with the complete disappearance, the abandoning, the non-arising, of these ten kinds of perceptions of resistance, that is to say, of the five profitableresultant and five unprofitable-resultant; causing their non-occurrence, is what[^p134-2] is meant.

It should be noted that only perception through the five physical senses is excluded from the base of boundless space. No mention is made of the disappearance of dhammasaññā, perception of mental objects, for the reason that this type of perception remains. Although sensory perceptions are also absent in the four jhānas, their disappearance is accentuated here to emphasize the fading away of attachment to material form and to[^p134-3] arouse a greater interest in the formless jhānas.

3. “With non-attention to perceptions of variety” (nānattasaññāna. amanasikārā)

According to the Vibhaṅga, perceptions of variety are “the perception, perceiving, perceivedness, in one who has not attained and possesses either mind-element or mind[^p134-4] consciousness element.” (Wr. tr.). Perceptions of variety are thus the non-sensory perceptions in the states of consciousness of those who are not absorbed in a meditative attainment. The phrase “possesses either mind-element or mind-consciousness element” excludes the bare sense perceptions, the elimination of which is already covered by “perceptions of resistance.” When the text lays down non-attention to perceptions of variety as a condition for reaching the base of boundless space, this means that the yogin

must not advert to these perceptions having various diversified objects, since to attend to[^p135-1] them or review them is obstructive to attaining the immaterial jhānas.

According to the Visuddhimagga, the phrase “with the surmounting of perceptions of matter” signifies the abandonment of all fine material-sphere states, and the other two phrases the abandonment of and non-attention to all sense-sphere consciousness and its[^p135-2] concomitants.

4. “Unbounded space’ (ananto ākāso)

The “unbounded space” which the meditator becomes aware of is the space left by the removal of the kasi5a after the latter has been extended boundlessly. The space is called “unbounded” or “endless” (ananta) because neither a beginning boundary nor a terminal boundary can be perceived for it. The meditator “enters upon and dwells in the base of boundless space” in the sense that after reaching that attainment he abides in the jhāna which has the base of boundless space as its object.

The Second Āruppa: The Base of Boundless Consciousness (viññā3añcāyatana) To attain the second immaterial jhāna the yogin must gain mastery over the base consisting of boundless space; then he must discern its defects. The first immaterial state is defective, firstly, because it is still close to the fine material jhānas, and secondly, because it is not as peaceful as the base consisting of boundless consciousness. By reflecting on these defects he develops indifference to the attainment and turns his attention to the base of boundless consciousness.

To develop the second āruppa the meditator focuses upon the consciousness that[^p135-3] occurred pervading the boundless space of the first āruppa. In other words, the second āruppa has as its object the consciousness pertaining to the first āruppa. Since the object of the first āruppa, space, was boundless, the consciousness of this object also contained an aspect of boundlessness, and it is to this boundless consciousness that the aspirant for the second āruppa should advert. He is not to attend to it merely as boundless, but as “boundless consciousness” or simply as “consciousness.” As he does so the hindrances are suppressed and the mind enters access concentration. He continues to cultivate this sign again and again, until the consciousness belonging to the base of boundless consciousness arises in absorption. The cognitive series should be understood as in the previous attainment, with the appropriate changes made to fit the case.

The formula for the attainment of the base consisting of boundless consciousness reads thus: “By completely surmounting the base consisting of boundless space, [aware of] ‘unbounded consciousness’, he enters upon and dwells in the base consisting of[^p135-4] boundless conciousness”. According to the word-commentary on this passage, the

phrase “base consisting of boundless space” signifies both the first immaterial jhāna and the object of that jhāna. The surmounting of the base means the overcoming of both the jhāna and its object together, since the base of boundless consciousness is to be entered and dwelt in by passing beyond both aspects of the base of boundless space.

To be aware of “unbounded consciousness” is to give attention to the consciousness that occurred pervading the space left by the removal of the kasi5a. Thus the object of this jhāna is the consciousness that had pervaded boundless space in the previous jhāna. As it is said in the Vibhaṅga: “He gives attention to that same space pervaded by[^p136-1] consciousness, he pervades boundlessly, hence ‘Unbounded consciousness’ is said.” And the commentator adds: “What is meant by ‘He pervades boundlessly’ is that ‘he[^p136-2] gives attention to that same consciousness which had pervaded that space’.” The boundless consciousness which pervaded boundless space is itself the base consisting in boundless consciousness, and the jhāna as well, because it is founded upon this base, derivatively comes to be called by the same name.

The Third Āruppa: The Base of Nothingness (ākiñcaññāyatana) To attain the next āruppa, the base of nothingness, the meditator who has mastered the base of boundless consciousness in the five ways must perceive this attainment as defective due to its proximity to the base of boundless space and its grossness compared to the next higher jhāna. By recognizing these dangers the meditator removes his attachment to the base of boundless consciousness; then he should advert to the base of nothingness as more peaceful. The way to concentrate on the base consisting of nothingness is to

give attention to the [present] non-existence, voidness, secluded aspect of that same [past] consciousness belonging to the base consisting of boundless space which became the object of [the consciousness belonging to] the base[^p136-3] consisting of boundless consciousness.

In other words, to attain the base of nothingness the yogin has to focus upon the present absence or non-existence of the consciousness belonging to the base consisting of boundless space. He is advised to advert to it over and over, thinking to himself “There is not, there is not” or “void, void,” etc. When his practice matures there arises in absorption consciousness belonging to the base of nothingness, making the non-existence of the consciousness of boundless space its object.

Though both the base of boundless consciousness and base of nothingness are concerned objectively with the consciousness of the base of boundless space, they relate to it in opposite ways. The second āruppa objectifies it positively: it focusses upon the

consciousness of boundless space as present and seeks to appropriate its boundlessness for itself. The third āruppa, in contrast, relates to the consciousness of the base of boundless space negatively. It excludes this consciousness from awareness, making the absence or non-existence of this consciousness its object. As the Visuddhimagga explains:

Suppose a man sees a community of bhikkhus gathered together in a meeting hall or some such place and then goes elsewhere; then after the bhikkhus have risen at the conclusion of the business for which they had met and have departed, the man comes back, and as he stands in the doorway looking at that place again, he sees it only as void, he sees it only as secluded, he does not think ‘so many bhikkhus have died, so many have left the district’, but rather he sees only the nonexistence thus, ‘this is void, secluded’ – so too, having formerly dwelt seeing with the jhāna eye belonging to the base consisting of boundless consciousness the [earlier] consciousness that had occurred making the space its object, [now] when that consciousness has disappeared owing to his giving attention to the preliminary work in the way beginning ‘there is not, there is not’, he dwells seeing only its non-existence, in other words its[^p137-1] departedness when this consciousness has arisen in absorption.

The texts describe the attainment of the third āruppa with a standard formula: “By completely surmounting the base consisting of boundless consciousness, [aware that][^p137-2] ‘There is nothing’, he enters upon and dwells in the base consisting of nothingness.” According to the commentary on this formula, the “base of boundless consciousness” which must be surmounted is both the second immaterial jhāna and its object together, since the third immaterial jhāna must be reached by passing beyond the second and by[^p137-3] relinquishing attachment to its object. The phrase “there is nothing” is explained in the Vibhaṅga thus: “‘There is nothing’: he makes that same consciousness non-existent, makes it absent, makes it disappear, sees that ‘there is nothing’, hence ‘There is nothing’[^p137-4] is said.” To make “that same consciousness,” i.e., the consciousness belonging to the base of boundless space, nonexistent means not to advert to it or attend to it, but to attend only to its non-existence or absence. By so doing, the yogin “enters and dwells in the base consisting of nothingness.” The base consisting of nothingness, which is the

foundation for the third formless jhāna, is “a term for the disappearance of the[^p138-1] consciousness belonging to the base consisting of boundless space.”

The Fourth Āruppa: The Base of Neither Perception nor Non-perception (nevasaññā nāsaññāyatana) If the yogin wants to go further and reach the fourth and highest āruppa attainment, he must first achieve fivefold mastery over the base of nothingness. Then he should contemplate the danger in that attainment, consisting in its proximity to the lower attainments. He should reflect upon the base of neither perception nor non-perception as superior and more peaceful. He can also reflect upon the unsatisfactoriness of perception, thinking: “perception is a disease, perception is a boil, perception is a dart…[^p138-2] this is peaceful, this is sublime, that is to say, neither perception nor non-perception.” In this way he ends his attachment to the base of nothingness and arouses a desire to attain the base of neither perception nor non-perception.

The base of neither perception nor non-perception has as its object the four mental aggregates that constitute the attainment of the base of nothingness – that is, the aggregates of feeling, perception, mental formations, and consciousness. Just as the second āruppa took as its object the consciousness belonging to the first āruppa, so the fourth āruppa takes as its object the consciousness and associated states belonging to the third āruppa. Focussing on the four mental aggregates of the base of nothingness, the meditator adverts to the base as “peaceful, peaceful,” reviewing it and striking at it with applied and sustained thought. As he does so the hindrances are suppressed, the mind enters access concentration, and then passes into absorption pertaining to the base of neither perception nor non-perception. The process of attainment is described in the canon thus: “By completely surmounting the base consisting of nothingness he enters[^p138-3] and dwells in the base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception.”

Though the yogin, as the formula points out, attains the base of neither perception nor non-perception by passing beyond the base of nothingness, it still should be borne in mind that this fourth attainment has the third as its object. The yogin reached the fourth āruppa by focussing upon the base of nothingness as “peaceful, peaceful.” In the Vibhaṅga it is said that the meditator who reaches the level that is neither percipient nor non-percipient “gives attention to that same base consisting of nothingness as[^p138-4] peaceful.”

At this point the question may arise as to how the meditator can overcome the base of nothingness if he attends to it as peaceful. The Visuddhimagga answers that although the meditator gives attention to the third āruppa as peaceful, he has no desire to attain it,

since he has reflected upon the base of neither perception nor non-perception as more peaceful and superior. Buddhaghosa illustrates this with the example of a king who might see craftsmen at work while he is proceeding along a city street with the pomp of royalty. Though he might admire their skill and accomplishment in their crafts, the king would not want to become a craftsman himself, since he is aware of the superior benefits of kingship. Similarly,

Though this [meditator] gives attention to that attainment as ‘peaceful’, yet there is no concern in him or reaction or attention such as ‘I shall advert to this attainment’ or ‘I shall attain this’ or ‘I shall resolve upon [the duration of] it’,[^p139-1] or ‘I shall emerge from it’ or ‘I shall review it’.”

The commentaries such as the Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā and the Visuddhimagga go to great length to explain the meaning of the term “neither perception nor non-perception,” which suggests the abstruse nature of this jhāna. The jhāna receives this name because on the one hand it lacks gross perception and on the other retains a subtle perception. Lacking gross perception, it cannot perform the decisive function of perception, i.e., the clear discernment of objects, and thus cannot be called “having perception” (neva saññā). But yet this attainment retains an extremely subtle perception as a residual formation, and thus cannot be called “without perception” (nāsaññā). To make plain this ambivalent character of the jhāna it is named “the base of neither perception nor non-perception.” Perception is not the only mental factor that persists in this attainment in residual form; all the other mental factors such as feeling, consciousness, contact, and the rest also continue reduced to the finest subtlety. Thus this jhāna is also named “the attainment with residual formations” (sa/khārāvasesā[^p139-2] samāpatti).

The commentaries illustrate the method of naming this attainment by means of the following anecdote. A novice smeared a bowl with oil and an elder monk asked him to bring the bowl to serve gruel. The novice replied, “Venerable sir, there is oil in the bowl.” Then the monk told him, “Bring the oil, novice, I shall fill the oil tube.”[^p139-3] Thereupon the novice said: “There is no oil, Venerable sir.” In this tale what the novice said is true in both cases: there is no oil since there is not enough to fill the tube yet there is no utter absence of oil since some remains at the base of the bowl. Similarly, in this attainment perception cannot be said to be fully present since it is so subtle that it cannot perform the decisive function of perceiving an object; yet it cannot be said to be absent since it remains in residual form.

With this fourth formless jhāna the mind has reached the highest possible level of development in the direction of serenity (samathabhāvanā). Consciousness has attained to the most intense degree of concentration, becoming so subtle and so refined that it can no longer be described in terms of existence or non-existence. Yet even this

attainment, as we will see, is still a mundane state which, from the Buddhist perspective, must finally give way to insight that alone leads to true liberation.

General Remarks on the Āruppas Although the immaterial jhānas, unlike the fine material jhānas, are not given numerical names, they do follow a fixed sequence and must be attained in the order in which they are presented. That is, the yogin who wishes to achieve the immaterial jhānas must begin with the base of boundless space and then proceed step by step up to the base of neither perception nor non-perception. In this respect the accomplishment of the formless attainments corresponds to that of the lower four jhānas. However, an important difference separates the modes of progress in the two cases. In the case of the fine material jhānas, the ascent from one jhāna to another involves a surmounting of jhāna factors. To rise from the first jhāna to the second the yogin must eliminate applied thought and sustained thought, to rise from the second to the third he must overcome rapture, and to rise from the third to the fourth he must replace pleasant with neutral feeling. Thus progress involves a reduction and refinement of the jhāna factors, from the initial five to the culmination in mental one-pointedness and neutral feeling.

Once the fourth jhāna is reached the jhāna factors remain constant. In the higher ascent to the immaterial attainments there is no further elimination of jhāna factors. For this reason the formless jhānas, when classified from the perspective of their factorial constitution as is done in the Abhidhamma, are considered as modalities of the fourth jhāna. Thus the Dhammasaṅgaṇi presents the formula for the first immaterial attainment as follows:

When the path to rebirth in the immaterial realm is cultivated, then with the entire surpassing of perceptions of material form, with the disappearance of perceptions of resistance, by paying no attention to perceptions of variety, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, he enters upon and dwells in the fourth jhāna which has neitherpain-nor-pleasure and has purity of mindfulness due to equanimity and is associated with equanimity, associated with the perception of boundless[^p140-1] space. (Wr. tr.).

Similarly, the formulas for each of the other three immaterial attainments are conjoined with the formula for the fourth. All these āruppas are two-factored jhānas, constituted by mental one-pointedness and equanimous feeling.

Rather than being determined by a surmounting of factors, the order of the āruppas is determined by a surmounting of objects. Whereas for the lower jhānas the object can remain constant but the factors must be changed, for the immaterial jhānas the factors remain constant while the objects change. As we saw, the base of boundless space

eliminates the kasi5a object of the fourth jhāna, the base of boundless consciousness surmounts the object of the base of boundless space, the base of nothingness surmounts the object of the base of boundless consciousness, and the base of neither perception nor non-perception surmounts the object of the base of nothingness.

Because the objects become progressively more subtle at each level the jhāna factors of equanimous feeling and one-pointedness, while remaining constant in nature throughout, become correspondingly more refined in quality. Buddhaghosa illustrates this with two similes. The first compares the four formless jhānas to the floors of a four-storied palace with progressively finer objects of sense pleasure on each floor. There is no difference between the floors in regard to their nature as palace-floors, but only in regard to the objects of enjoyment found on them. The second simile compares the four formless jhānas to four pieces of cloth of the same measurements, yet made of thick, thin, thinner, and very thin thread respectively, all spun by the same person. Though there is no difference in their nature as pieces of cloth or in their measurements, yet they differ in their softness to the touch, fineness, and costliness. Similarly,

although there are only the two factors in all four [immaterial states], that is to say, equanimity and unification of mind, still each one should be understood as finer than the one before with the progressive refinement of the factors due[^p141-1] to successful development.

Whereas the four lower jhānas can each take a variety of objects – the ten kasi5as, the in-and-out breath, etc. – and do not stand in any integral relation to these objects, the four immaterial jhānas each take a single object which is so intimately related to the attainments that they interconnect in a closely knit manner. As we pointed out, the second āruppa takes as its object the consciousness pertaining to the first āruppa, the third the non-existence or disappearance of this same consciousness, and the fourth the four mental aggregates making up the third āruppa. Buddhaghosa illustrates this relation of successive dependence with another one of his picturesque analogies. A man arrived at a dirty place where a tent was set up, and being disgusted with the dirt, he hung on to the tent. Another man came along and leant upon the man hanging on to the tent. A third arrived, and thinking both were insecure, stood outside the tent. A fourth came, found the third man more securely placed, and leant upon him. The commentator connects the similes with the four āruppas thus:

The space from which the kasi5a has been removed is like the tent in the dirty place. The [consciousness of the] base consisting of boundless space, which makes space its object owing to disgust with the sign of the fine-material, is like the man who hangs on to the tent owing to disgust with the dirt. The [consciousness of the] base consisting of boundless consciousness, the occurrence of which is contingent upon [the consciousness of] the base consisting of boundless space whose object is space, is like the man who leans upon the man who hangs on to the tent. The [consciousness of the] base consisting of nothingness, which instead of making the [consciousness of the]

base consisting of boundless space its object has the non-existence of that as its object, is like the man who, after considering the insecurity of those two does not lean upon the one hanging on to the tent, but stands outside. The (consciousness of the] base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception, the occurrence of which is contingent upon [the consciousness of] the base consisting of nothingness, which stands in a place outside, in other words, in the non-existence of [the past] consciousness, is like the man who stands leaning upon the last-named, having considered the insecurity of the one hanging on to the tent and the one leaning upon him, and fancying that[^p142-1] the one standing outside is well placed.

Although the yogin who aspires to reach the base of neither perception nor-nonperception has seen the flaws in the base of nothingness, it is necessary for him to take this base as his object since there is no other object sufficiently subtle to serve as a foundation for reaching the highest formless attainment. This is similar to the case of men who remain loyal to a despotic king because they depend on him for their[^p142-2] livelihood. Thus it is evident that all eight attainments represent a gradual development, each succeeding one depending on its predecessor.

Although these four immaterial jhānas are separately described in the suttas they are not mentioned as often as the four fine material jhānas. The reason for this omission can be understood to be their implicit inclusion in the fourth jhāna. This inclusion is made because of their similarity of factors. Therefore, in places where the practices beyond the jhānas are discussed, the fourth jhāna alone is mentioned as their prerequisite since the āruppas are understood to be incorporated within it.

## The Modes of Direct Knowledge

In the suttas the meditator who has attained and mastered the fourth jhāna is sometimes shown as proceeding to attain certain kinds of supernormal knowledge. In a stock passage it is said that when, after emerging from the fourth jhāna, the meditator’s concentrated mind is “thus purified, bright, unblemished, rid of defilement, and has[^p142-3] become malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability,” he directs it to the achievement of various powers of higher knowledge. These modes of higher knowledge are presented in different sets of varying number in the texts. Some suttas mention three, called the “threefold knowledge” (tevijjā). These are: [1] the knowledge of recollecting previous lives (pubbenivāsānussatiñā5a); [2] the knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings (cutūpapātañā5a); and [3] the knowledge of the destruction of the[^p142-4] cankers (āsavakkhayañā5a). Some suttas mention five kinds of direct knowledge

(pañcābhiññā): [1] the knowledge of the modes of supernormal power (iddhividhañā5a); [2] the divine ear-element (dibbasotadhātuñā5a); [3] the knowledge of others’ minds (cetopariyañā5a); [4] the knowledge of recollecting previous lives; [5] the[^p143-1] knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings. Other suttas expand this list to six 2 (cha8abhiññā) by adding the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers. In this case the first five are called mundane modes of direct knowledge (lokiya abhiññā), the sixth the supramundane direct knowledge (lokuttara abhiññā). Still other suttas present a set of eight modes of higher knowledge. This set, which does not have a special name, consists of the above six abhiññās augmented by knowledge and vision (ñā5adassana)[^p143-3] and the knowledge of the mind-created body (manomayiddhiñā5a). We will discuss these modes of higher knowledge in turn, taking the six abhiññās as the basis for our account and then adding explanations of the others. But first a few remarks are called for on the preliminaries for the modes of direct knowledge.

The Prerequisites for Direct Knowledge In order to develop the five mundane abhiññās, as well as the knowledge of the mindcreated body, it is necessary to have gained proficiency in the eight meditative attainments (aṭṭhasamāpattiyo) comprising the four fine material jhānas and the four immaterial jhānas. Although the suttas often show the exercise of the abhiññās taking place immediately after the fourth jhāna, without mentioning the formless attainments, the commentaries state that the latter also have to be understood as their prerequisites. The reason they are not mentioned is that they are implicitly included by the fourth jhāna, which alone serves as the immediate basis for the exercise of the abhiññās.

Thus the commentary to the Dīgha Nikāya states:

There is no achievement of the higher kinds of direct knowledge without accomplishing mastery over the eight meditative attainments in the fourteen ways [to be explained]. In the texts only the fine material jhānas are given;[^p143-4] however the immaterial jhānas should be included and explained. (Wr. tr.).

The subcommentary to this passage elaborates the point further:

When it is said that this method (of attaining direct knowledge) does not succeed without the immaterial attainments, their indispensability should be understood. If so, then why aren’t the immaterial jhānas mentioned in the text? Specifically, since the fourth fine-material jhāna is the basis for all the abhiññās, they are taught by being included within that (jhāna). It is not that

the immaterial jhānas are not instrumental here. Hence (the commentary)[^p144-1] says: ‘the immaterial jhānas should be included and explained’. (Wr. tr.).

The Sāratthadīpanī, a Vinaya subcommentary, states the same point more succinctly: “‘Four jhānas’ is said because the four imaterial jhānas attained by the elimination of[^p144-2] desire for the fine material jhānas are included in the fourth jhāna.” (Wr. tr.).

All this means that mastery of the four fine material jhānas, without mastering the āruppas, is not sufficient for achieving the mundane abhiññās. To attain the mundane kinds of direct knowledge the formless jhānas also must be mastered, and therefore when the fourth jhāna is shown as preceding the abhiññās the prior acquisition of the āruppas should be understood. It should be mentioned, however, that the mundane jhānas and the exercises based on them are not requirements for the sixth, supramundane abhiññā. This latter is the outcome of wisdom rather than of absorption, as we will see below.

For the meditator to achieve the abhiññās he should accomplish the eight attainments in each of the eight kasi5as, the four elemental kasi5as (earth, water, fire, and air) and the four color kasi5as (blue, yellow, red, and white). Then he should acquire complete[^p144-3] control of his mind in the following fourteen ways:

[1] The meditator must attain jhāna in the eight kasi5as in the direct order given in the texts (kasi5ānuloma), i.e., from the earth kasi5a through to the white kasi5a, doing so even up to a thousand times in each one until he is fully adept at it. [2] Having mastered the direct order, the yogin should attain jhāna in the kasi5as in reverse order (kasi5àpa(iloma), moving from the white kasi5a back to the earth kasi5a. [3] He should next attain jhāna again and again in forward and reverse order (kasi5ānulomapa(iloma) from the earth kasi5a to the white kasi5a and then back again.

[4] The yogin should attain each of the attainments in direct order from the first jhāna up to the base of neither perception nor non-perception (jhānānuloma). [5] Then he should master the jhānas in reverse order (jhànàpañiloma), from the eight down to the first. And next [6] he moves through the jhānas in both direct and reverse order (jhānānulomapa(iloma).

[7] The meditator should skip alternate jhānas (jhānukkantika) while retaining the same kasi5a. That is, with the earth kasi5a as object, he should attain the first jhāna, third jhāna, the base of boundless space, and the base of nothingness, then repeat the same for the water kasi5a, etc. [8] Then he should skip alternate kasi5as (kasi5ukkantika) without

skipping jhānas; he attains the first jhāna in the earth, fire, blue, and red kasi5as, then repeats the same for each of the other jhānas. [9] The meditator next proceeds to skipping jhānas and kasi5as together (jhānakasi5ukkantika). He should attain the first jhāna in the earth kasi5a, the third in the fire kasi5a, the base of boundless space by removing the blue kasi5a, and the base of nothingness arrived at through the red kasi5a.

[l0] The next stage, called “transposition of factors”, (a/gasa/kantika) involves attaining the first jhāna up to the fourth āruppa all in the same kasi5a. [11] He then attains the first jhāna in each of the kasi5as from the earth kasi5a through the white kasi5a. This is called “transposition of objects” (āramma5asankantika). [12] The combined “transposition of factors and objects” (aïgāramma5asankantika) involves changing the jhānas and objects in matched correspondence to each other, that is, attaining the first jhāna in the earth kasi5a, the second in the water kasi5a, the third in the fire kasi5a, and so forth up to the base of neither perception nor non-perception arrived at from the white kasi5a.

[13] The “definition of factors” (aïgavavatthāpana) means defining each of the jhānas from the first to the eighth by way of its constituent factors, the first as five-factored, the second as three-factored, etc. [14] The definition of object (āramma5avavatthāpana) means defining only the object, as “This is the earth kasina”, etc., up to “This is the white kasi5a.”

After mastering these fourteen modes the meditator should develop the four bases of accomplishment, that is zeal (chanda), consciousness (citta), energy (viriya), and[^p145-1] inquiry (vīmaṃsā). He should cultivate these intensively in order to attain the desired type of direct knowledge. Having fulfilled all the preliminary conditions, the meditator must direct his mind to the kind of supernormal knowledge he wishes to attain. The abhiññās do not come as automatic by-products of jhāna but require a prior resolution and determinate effort on the part of the yogin. As the Buddha says, when the meditator’s mind is concentrated and purified “he directs, he inclines his mind to the[^p145-2] kinds of supernormal power.”

The Six Abhiññās

1. Knowledge of the modes of supernormal power (iddhividhañā3a) The Pāli word iddhi, which we translate as “supernormal power”, comes from the Sanskrit root rddh, which means to prosper or to succeed. Iddhi thus means, literally, prosperity, success, or accomplishment, but the main sense suggested by the word is an ability to perform feats which go against the normal course of natural events. For this reason the iddhis have sometimes been interpreted as supernatural or miraculous powers. However, from the Buddhist standpoint these powers do not derive from any divine or supernatural source but from a psychic potency based upon a superior understanding of the inner dynamics of nature. Thus they operate completely within the framework of the

law of cause and effect and the “miracles” for which they are responsible remain entirely natural.

The kinds of supernormal power exercised by a meditator are described in the texts in the following stock passage;

When his concentrated mind is thus purified… and attained to imperturbability, he directs, he inclines his mind to the kinds of supernormal power. He wields the various kinds of supernormal power. Having been one, he becomes many; having been many, he becomes one. He appears and vanishes. He goes unhindered through walls, through enclosures, through mountains, as though in open space. He dives in and out of the earth as though in water. He goes on unbroken water as though on earth. Seated cross-legged he travels in space like a winged bird. With his hand he touches and strokes the moon and sun so mighty and powerful. He wields bodily mastery even as far as the Brahmā[^p146-1] world.

In this passage eight supernormal powers are expounded. We will examine them briefly one by one.

[1] The first supernormal power is becoming many after having been one or becoming one after having been many (eko pi hutvā bahudhā hoti, bahudhā pi hutvā eko hoti). This means the ability to create many appearances or forms of oneself and then to dissolve those many forms and return to the condition of having a single body. To exercise this power the meditator should enter the fourth jhāna as a basis for direct knowledge and emerge from it. Then he must resolve on the number of forms of himself he wishes to create. He again attains the fourth jhāna, emerges, and resolves. Simultaneously with the resolving consciousness he becomes the number of forms he decided upon – a hundred, a thousand, etc., as he wishes, (presumably in most cases the ability to create an increasing number of forms must be gradually acquired). Unless a specific determination is made otherwise, the many created forms will appear just like the original and perform the same actions he performs. But if the yogin makes a prior resolution, he can display his many forms with different appearances and cause them to perform different actions. To become one again he should repeat the original procedure, resolving to become one. But if he originally resolved to appear as many for a limited[^p146-2] time, the many forms will disappear automatically when the time lapses.

[2] The second power is causing appearance and disappearance (āvībhāvatirobhāva.). “Causing appearance” means making a dark area appear light, making what is hidden become visible, or making oneself or others become visible even when at a distance. “Causing disappearance” means making a bright area appear dark, making what is manifest become invisible, or making oneself or others become invisible even when within range of sight. The procedure is the same as in the case of the previous power except that the resolution is changed.

[3] To exercise the power of going through walls, enclosures, and mountains as though through space (tiro-ku>>a. tiro-pākāra. tiro-pabbata.) the yogin should attain the fourth jhāna in the space kasi5a. Then he does the preliminary work by adverting to the wall, enclosure or mountain, etc. and resolving upon it as space. As a result of his resolution it becomes space and he passes through it unhindered.

[4] In order to acquire the ability to dive in and out of the ground as if it were water (pa(haviyā pi ummujja nimmujja. karoti seyyathā pi udake) the yogin must have obtained the water kasi5a attainment. He enters into the fourth jhāna on the water kasi5a and emerges. Then he adverts to a portion of ground and resolves upon it thus “Let there be water.” The earth becomes water and he can dive in it, bathe in it, drink it, etc. If he resolves only this much the earth becomes water for him alone, but if he makes a determination it can become water for others as well.

[5] The yogin who wishes to walk on water without sinking as though it were earth (udake pi abhijjamāno gacchati seyyathā pi pa(ha-viya.) should be skilled in the earth kasi5a. He enters the fourth jhāna on the earth kasi5a, emerges, and resolves “Let the water become earth.” He repeats the procedure, and with the resolution the water in the determined area becomes earth. Then he can walk on it without falling in.

[6] To travel through space like a bird (ākāse pi palla/kena kamati seyyathā pi pakkhī saku5o), the yogin obtains the earth kasi5a and emerges. He determines upon space as being earth, thinking “Let there be earth.” For him space becomes solid like the earth, and he can walk, stand, sit, or lie down there just as men normally can do on the ground.

[7] The next power, touching and stroking the sun and moon with one’s hand (ime pi candima-suriyā eva. mahiddhike eva. mahānubhāve pā5inā parimasati parimajjati), does not require a special kasiLa, but is accomplished simply through the fourth jhāna that is made a basis for direct knowledge. The Pa:isambhidāmagga describes this power thus:

Here he who has controlled his mind and has attained psychic powers, contemplates on the sun and moon… resolves through super knowledge: ‘Let them come to the side of my hand’ and they appear. Seated or lying down he[^p147-1] handles, feels, touches, the sun and moon with his hand.

The meditator, according to the Visuddhimagga, can either go to the sun and moon and touch them, or make them come into hand’s reach by a mental resolution, doing so by[^p147-2] enlarging his hand. But though he does all this, for others the sun and moon remain the same, their radiance and movement being unaffected.

[8] The last of the powers is exercising bodily mastery as far as the Brahma-world (yāva Brahma-lokā pi kāyena vā sa.vatteti). Having attained the basic jhāna, the meditator who wants to go to the Brahma-world can resolve upon it as near and it becomes as he

wishes. He can make the near become distant, the many become few, and the few become many. The Pa:isambhidāmagga describes some of the masteries the yogin can exercise thus:

If he, who is possessed of psychic power, and has controlled his will wishes to go to the Brahma-world, he resolves that the distant be near, and it becomes near; he resolves that the near be distant, and it becomes distant; he resolves that the many be few, and they become few; he resolves that the few be many, and they become many. With the divine-sight he sees the Brahma’s form; with the divine-hearing element he hears the Brahma’s voice; with the knowledge of others’ minds he knows the Brahma’s mind. If he wishes to go to the Brahma-world in this visible body, he applies his jhāna-mind to the physical body, he resolves concerning the mind as the body; having applied the mind to the body, he enters into the thought of ease and lightness, and in his visible body he goes to the Brahma-world. If he… wishes to go to the Brahma-world in an invisible body, he applies his body to the mind, he resolves the body as the mind… he enters into the thought of ease and lightness and in an invisible body goes to the Brahma-world. In the presence of Brahma he creates a mind-formed body… He walks to and fro, the created body walks also to and fro. If he stands… sits… lies down, the created body also… lies down. If he emits vapour… flames… speaks… whatever he does, so does the created[^p148-1] body.

According to the Visuddhimagga, “applying the jhāna-mind to the physical body” and “resolving upon the mind as the body” means making the mind accord with the material body. When the yogin enters into the “thought of ease and lightness” his physical body becomes as light as a tuft of cotton, and he can go to the Brahma-world with a visible body as light as a tuft of cotton wafted by the wind. On the other hand “applying the body to the mind” and “resolving the body as the mind” mean taking the body and mounting it on the mind, so as to make its mode of going swift like that of the mind. All these practices form the preliminary exercise for reaching the Brahma-world, but do not yet constitute the “wielding of bodily mastery as far as the Brahma-world.” The wielding of bodily power begins, in the above passage, with the creation of a mind-formed body in the presence of Brahma, continuing through the feats that follow[^p148-2] this down to “whatever he does, so does the created body.”

Iddhi and Pā9ihāriya The possession of iddhi is regarded as a desirable quality in a bhikkhu which contributes[^p148-3] to the completeness of his spiritual perfection. However, exhibiting supernormal powers to gain adherents, win offerings, or obtain popularity has been prohibited by the Buddha. In the Vinaya the display of supernormal feats or psychic powers is classified as

1 an offense of wrong doing (āpatti-dukka(a). Nevertheless, while the Buddha rebuked PiLYola Bhāradvāja for exhibiting his powers to obtain a sandalwood bowl, he expressed[^p149-2] approval of Moggallāna’s exercise of iddhis. The reason for this difference is that the former made an indiscreet public exhibition of his power while the latter used his powers judiciously. The Buddha approved of the exhibition of psychic power only when it helps eliminate the defilements in peoples’ minds and makes them free from obsessions.

Sometimes the word iddhi appears in combination with another word pā(ihāriya, which means literally “prevention” or “warding off” but assumes the sense of “wonder” or “marvel”; the compound iddhipā(ihāriya thus signifies the “wonder of supernormal powers.” The term appears in the suttas in a triad of pā(ihāriyas comprising the following items: [1] the wonder of supernormal powers (iddhipā(ihāriya); [2] the wonder of manifestation or thought-reading (ādesanapā(ihāriya); and [3] the wonder of[^p149-3] education (anusāsanīpā(ihāriya). The first is explained simply by the stock passage on the supernormal powers. The wonder of manifestation involves telling people what their mental states are on the basis of thought-reading, interpretation, or messages received[^p149-4] from other beings, human or non-human. The wonder of education is the ability to guide others in their spiritual development, telling them: “You should think these thoughts, you should not think those thoughts; you should attend in this way, not in that[^p149-5] way; you should abandon this; you should enter and abide thus.” Those who impart this education know exactly what to urge their pupils to avoid and what to urge them to develop.

Of the three types of pā(ihāriya, the Buddha disapproved of the use of the first two as means of converting people to his teaching. He said that there are certain magical sciences (vijjā) which can enable a person to perform supernormal feats or practice thought reading and thus these wonders cannot be taken as indicators of real spiritual[^p149-6] accomplishment. The wonder to which he gave unqualified approval was the wonder of education, which alone leads to liberation from suffering.

The Pa:isambhidāmagga, elaborating this idea, states that the wonderful methods which promote renunciation, non-hatred, mental luminosity, composure of mind, determination of righteousness, wisdom, bliss, the attainment of the jhānas, etc., up to the path of arahatship are called the true iddhi as they bring real accomplishment and success. The methods that destroy sensual desire, ill will, sloth and torpor, restlessness and remorse, doubt, ignorance, clinging, the hindrances and defilements are called the real pā(ihāriya[^p149-7] for the reason that they prevent one from falling back into saṃsāra. Thus for early

Buddhism the practice of the noble path rather than performance of miracles constitutes the truly wonderful accomplishment.

2. The second abhiññā: the divine ear-element (dibbasotadhatu) The divine ear-element is the ability to hear the sounds of deities as well as of human beings, and to hear sounds that are far off, even in another world system, as well as sounds that are extremely near, such as the sounds of the creatures living in one’s own[^p150-1] body. The texts describe the divine ear-element as follows:

He directs, he inclines, his mind to the divine ear-element. With the divine ear-element, which is purified and surpasses the human, he hears both kinds[^p150-2] of sounds, the divine and the human, those that are far as well as near.

Technically, the divine ear-element refers to a particular capacity for knowledge, called an “ear-element” for the reason that it exercises the function of the normal ear, namely, acting as a basis for the hearing of sounds. This element is said to be “divine” because it is similar to the ear-element of the deities, which is liberated from imperfections and[^p150-3] capable of receiving far-off sounds.

To obtain the divine ear-element the meditator should attain the basic jhāna for direct-knowledge and then emerge from it. Keeping his mind at the level of preliminary-work concentration, he should advert first to gross sounds within the normal range of hearing, then gradually to more and more subtle sounds until he can hear the faintest sounds that can only be heard with the most careful attention. He should concentrate on each of the ten directions, attending to the precise “signs” or qualities of the sounds being heard.

When he concentrates his mind on these sounds with an earnest desire to gain the divine ear-element, in time a mind-door adverting consciousness will arise taking one of these sounds for its object. This will be followed by three or four javanas of the preliminary or access stage, and a fourth or fifth of the absorption level belonging to the fourth jhāna. The faculty of knowledge arisen in association with this absorption consciousness is called the divine ear-element.

If the yogin wishes to hear distant sounds he should begin by delimiting a small area, master the ability to hear the sounds in that area, and then extend the range of his hearing outward by degrees. As his ability improves he can hear distinctly all the sounds on earth and in the other planes of existence within a world system and even further. Moreover, if he wants to, he can define each sound separately, even when it is merged with other sounds.

3. The third abhiññā: the knowledge of others’ minds (cetopariya ñā3a paracittavijānana) The third abhiññā is the knowledge of others’ minds, the ability to penetrate with one’s own mind the mental states of others. The Buddha describes this abhiññā as follows:

With his mind thus concentrated… he applies and directs his mind to the knowledge of the state of others’ minds. Discriminating with his mind he understands the state of others’ minds: that of a mind with passion he understands that it is with passion, of one free from passion that it is free from passion… with hatred… free from hatred… with delusion… free from delusion… that which is composed… distracted… grown great (having attained to the rūpa and the arūpa jhānas)… not grown great… mean… lofty… concentrated… not concentrated… emancipated… not emancipated.[^p151-1] Thus he knows the state of others’ minds.

According to the explanation in the Visuddhimagga, a meditator who aspires to this knowledge must first have attained the divine eye, the faculty of supernormal vision (to be explained below). He should use the light-kasi5a to extend light, radiating it into the physical hearts of the people whose minds he wishes to understand. With his divine eye he should then examine the color of the heart, on the basis of which he can interpret the state of mind. The procedure is based on the belief that there is an immediate correspondence between the color of the blood and the state of consciousness. According to Buddhaghosa, when a joyous state of mind is present the blood is red like banyan fruit, when a state accompanied by grief is present the blood is black like rose-apple fruit, and when a state accompanied by serenity is present the blood is clear[^p151-2] like sesamum oil. Thus by perceiving with the divine eye the color of the blood the yogin can know the quality of a person’s consciousness. However, Buddhaghosa does not mention the correspondence between blood-color and states of mind accompanied by greed, hatred, delusion, and their opposites, as given in the sutta.

Once the meditator gains familiarity with reading minds on the basis of the blood color, he can learn to penetrate the minds of others directly, without having to rely on a physical basis for making inferences. It should be pointed out, however, that a meditator possessing this faculty of knowledge still cannot penetrate the minds of those on a higher level of attainment than his own. Thus a worldling with mundane direct knowledge cannot penetrate the mind of an ariyan and know how the latter is free from certain defilements. Similarly, a stream-enterer cannot penetrate the mind of a once-

returner, a once-returner the mind of a non-returner, a non-returner the mind of an arahant, or an arahant the mind of a paccekabuddha or fully enlightened Buddha. The converse, however, is possible: one on a higher plane, if he has the faculty of penetrating[^p152-1] others’ minds, can know the minds of those on a lower plane.

4. The fourth abhiññā: the knowledge of recollecting previous lives (pubbenivāsānussatiñā3a) The knowledge of recollecting previous lives is explained in the suttas as follows:

With his mind thus concentrated… he applies and directs his mind to the knowledge of recollecting previous existences. He recollects various kinds of former lives, such as one birth, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand births, many cycles of evolution of the universe, of dissolution, and of evolution and dissolution. ‘In that one I had such a name, clan, caste, such sustenance, experiencing such pleasure and pain, and having such an end of life. Passing away thence I was reborn in such a place. There too I had such a name, clan… and such an end of life. Passing away thence I was reborn here’. Thus he remembers various kinds[^p152-2] of his former lives with their modes and details.

According to the word explanation of the name for this abhiññā, “previous lives” means the mental and physical aggregates experienced in one’s own personal continuum in former births. “Recollection” (anussati), is the memory by which one recollects past[^p152-3] existences, and the abhiññā itself is the knowledge (ñā5a) arising out of that memory. The Visuddhimagga teaches that there are six classes of men who possess this knowledge – other sectarians, ordinary disciples of the Buddha, the great disciples, the chief disciples, paccekabuddhas, and fully enlightened Buddhas. The range of recollection belonging to these persons is proportional to their spiritual stature: sectarians can recollect only as far back as forty aeons (kappa), ordinary disciples as far as a thousand aeons, the eighty great disciples as far as a hundred thousand aeons, the two chief disciples as far as an incalculable (asa/kheyya) and a hundred thousand aeons, and paccekabuddhas as far as two incalculables and a hundred thousand aeons. For the fully enlightened Buddhas there is no limit to their capacity for recollection, which excels in[^p152-4] speed and clarity as well.

A meditator who wishes to cultivate this knowledge should attain the fourth jhāna as a basis for direct knowledge and then emerge from it. Having emerged he should start recalling his most recent activities in as precise detail as possible. Then he should go back in time by periods of the day, watches of the night, days and nights, etc. If he cannot recollect something he should attain the basic jhāna, emerge, and advert. The

experience of the jhāna clears away the obstructions to memory so that the apparently lost events become as evident as when a lamp is lit. Beginning with moments, he should go back in increasingly larger units – days, months, years, and so on – until he arrives at the moment of rebirth in the present existence. At this point he should advert to the mind and body at the moment of death in his preceding existence. If he cannot recall his past life at once due to the separation between lives he should not give up the task, but should attain the basic jhāna, emerge, and advert again and again if necessary.

When his ability has matured there will arise in him a mind-door adverting consciousness making its object the mind-body compound existing at the death-moment of his previous life. This will be followed by four or five impulsions (javanas) with the same object, the last of which is an absorption consciousness of the fourth jhāna. The knowledge associated with that consciousness is the knowledge of recollecting previous lives. Then beginning with the recollection of a single past life, the meditator should repeat the procedure with more and more past lives, until he can recall in detail his past[^p153-1] experiences in entire aeons on end. The Buddha compares this knowledge to the memory of a man who travels from village to village: while staying in one village he can recall the number of villages he has already visited, what he did in each village, and all[^p153-2] the details of his experience in each village.

5. The fifth abhiññā: the divine eye (dibbacakkhu) – the knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings (cutūpapātañā3a) The text describing this abhiññā reads:

With his mind thus concentrated… he applies and directs his mind to the knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings. With his divine vision, purified and surpassing human sight, he sees beings passing away and being reborn again, low or high, of good or bad appearance, in happy or miserable existences, according to their karma. He fully realizes that those beings who are revilers of the noble ones, who are of false views, who acquire the karma of their false views, at the dissolution of the body after death have been reborn in a miserable existence, in hell. But those beings who are given to good conduct in deed, word and thought, who are not revilers of the noble ones, who are of right views, who acquire the karma of their right views, at the dissolution of the body after death have been reborn in a happy existence, in[^p153-3] the world of heaven.

The knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings is acquired by means of the divine eye, a supernormal faculty of vision called “divine” because it is similar to the vision of the deities in its ability to perceive objects at remote distances and to see objects hidden behind walls, etc. This vision is also said to be “purified” because by bringing both death and rebirth into range, it contributes to the purification of

understanding. One who sees only passing away but not rebirth generally inclines to the annihilationist view that a being is extinguished at death; one who sees only birth but not the previous passing away generally inclines to the view that a new being arises. But one who sees both can acquire the purified view of rebirth according to kamma, thus abandoning these defiled views. The Visuddhimagga points out that one with the divine eye cannot see death and rebirth at the precise moments of their occurrence, due to the brevity and extreme subtlety of these events. What he sees are beings on the verge of death who will now die, and then those who have taken rebirth and have just re[^p154-1] appeared.

The commentaries recommend three kasi5as as the object for developing this knowledge – namely, the fire kasi5a, white kasi5a, or light kasi5a; of the three, the light kasi5a is said to be the most effective. After emerging from the basic jhāna, the meditator should focus on one of these kasi5as, stopping at the level of access concentration. He should not enter absorption since if he does he will not be able to perform the preliminary work for the direct-knowledge. At the level of access the meditator should extend the kasi5a image over a predetermined area, so that its light illuminates the area and visible forms within its space come into range of his vision. If the light disappears he should again enter the basic jhāna, emerge, and pervade the area with light. As time goes on he develops the ability to pervade any area with light and remain watching the visible forms there for a whole day. When visible forms that are not perceptible to the ordinary fleshly eye such as objects inside the body, objects hidden behind walls, objects in other planes of existence or in other world systems – come into the focus of the meditator’s eye of knowledge and are seen directly, then the divine eye has arisen. To make this divine eye the instrument for perceiving the passing away and rebirth of beings, the meditator should apply his divine vision to this object until it comes into view.

The Visuddhimagga says that the divine eye, or knowledge of passing away and rearising, has two accessory kinds of knowledge, namely, knowledge of the future (anāgata.sa ñā5a), and knowledge of faring according to kamma (yathākammūpaga[^p154-2] ñā5a). The former is the ability to foresee where a being will be reborn in the future and to foresee the course of future events. The latter is the ability to discern the kamma of the past that brought a being to a particular destiny in the present. Though these two types of knowledge are made possible by the divine eye, they differ from the knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings in that this last abhiññā has the present as its objective range while the other two have as their objective range the future and the past respectively. By counting these modes of direct knowledge separately, the number of mundane abhiññās possible for a meditator is totaled at seven. But when they are included within the divine eye, the number is given as five.

6. The sixth abhiññā: the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers (āsavakkhayañāṇa) The sixth direct-knowledge available to a meditator is the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers. The “cankers” are called in Pāli āsavas, meaning literally that which flows out; thus the word is sometimes translated “outflows.” The term signifies certain fundamental defilements which “flow out” from the mind, causing spiritual corruption and sustaining the process of saṃsāra. In the earliest texts the āsavas are usually given as three in number: the canker of sensual desire (kāmāsava), the canker of (craving for) existence (bhavāsava), and the canker of ignorance (avijjāsava). Other texts, particularly[^p155-1] those of the Abhidhammapi:aka, add a fourth, the canker of wrong views (diṭṭhāsava).

The meditator’s attainment of the destruction of the cankers is described in the suttas in the following passage:

With his mind thus concentrated… he applies, he directs his mind to the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers. He knows suffering as it is; he knows the origin of suffering as it is; he knows the cessation of suffering as it is; he knows the path leading to the cessation of suffering as it is. He knows the cankers as they are; he knows the origin of the cankers as it is; he knows the cessation of the cankers as it is; he knows the path leading to the cessation of cankers as it is. The mind of him who knows thus is liberated from the canker of sensual desire, from the canker of existence, and from the canker of ignorance. In him who is liberated the knowledge arises that he is liberated. He understands: ‘Rebirth is destroyed; the noble life has been lived; what was[^p155-2] to be done has been done; nothing else remains to be done henceforth’. (Wr. tr.).

According to the commentary, in this passage the destruction of the cankers can signify[^p155-3] either nibbāna or the fourth supramundane path, the path of arahatship. Nibbāna is called the destruction of the cankers because it is the state wherein the cankers are utterly destroyed; the path of arahatship is called thus because it brings about the destruction of the cankers. The “knowledge of the destruction of the cankers” is the faculty of knowledge contained in the consciousness belonging to the path of arahatship. As the stock description makes clear, the content of this knowledge is the Four Noble Truths. By knowing and seeing for himself with direct perception the Four Noble Truths in their full depth and range, the meditator eradicates the mental corruptions and attains

complete emancipation. As this realization results from insight, we will discuss it more fully in the next chapter, in connection with the supramundane paths.

For the present two observations should be made concerning the sixth abhiññā. First, we should note that though the texts often show the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers as following the fourth jhāna, the latter is not indispensable for its attainment. The realization of the Four Noble Truths can arise with any jhāna as its basis, and it is even recognized that some meditators can achieve the liberating knowledge without any previous experience in the mundane jhānas, solely by the power of their faculty of wisdom. What is required in all cases for the attainment of the noble paths is the development of insight (vipassanābhāvanā), which can be either based upon some prior attainment in jhānic concentration or proceed in a “dry” manner based solely upon the momentary concentration connected with mindful observation of phenomena. In this respect the sixth abhiññā differs from the other five, which all presuppose proficiency in the eight attainments belonging to absorption-concentration.

For this reason the sixth abhiññā differs from the other five in a second respect, namely, that it is regarded as an acquisition exclusive to the Buddha’s dispensation. The other five abhiññās are all mundane, being based solely upon the development of concentration, since the methods of developing concentration are available in nonBuddhist disciplines, those who follow these disciplines and achieve sufficient power of concentration can also acquire the five mundane abhiññās. However, the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers is a supramundane attainment which arises out of insight into the nature of phenomena. Hence it can only be gained by Buddhas, paccekabuddhas, and arahant disciples. In the case of the Buddhas and paccekabuddhas it arises out of their own self-evolved wisdom (saya.bhūñā5a); in the case of disciples it arises by practising insight meditation in accordance with the instructions received from a Buddha or from teachers who transmit his dispensation.

Because of these differences between the sixth abhiññā and the others, the abhiññās are collected together into two groups, overlapping, but distinct. On the one hand there is the five abhiññās, comprising the five kinds of mundane direct-knowledge; on the other there is the six abhiññās, comprising the five mundane forms of direct-knowledge together with the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers. While the mundane abhiññās are regarded as ornaments of a yogin within the Buddha’s dispensation, the sixth abhiññā is regarded as its vital essence, the supreme goal of the entire practice of meditation.

Other Kinds of Supernormal Knowledge In addition to the six abhiññās, certain suttas mention two other kinds of superior knowledge following the fourth jhāna. These are called “knowledge and vision” (ñā5adassana) and “the knowledge of the mind-created body” (manomaya iddhi ñā5a). In the texts they immediately precede the six abhiññās, though the eight are not[^p156-1] collected together into a single group with a collective name.

The textual description of “knowledge and vision” is as follows:

With his heart thus serene…, he applies and bends down his mind to that insight that comes from knowledge [knowledge and vision]. He grasps the fact: ‘This body of mine has form, it is built up of the four elements, it springs from father and mother, it is continually renewed by so much boiled rice and juicy foods, its very nature is impermanence, it is subject to erosion, abrasion, dissolution, and disintegration; and therein is this consciousness of mine, too,[^p157-1] bound up, on that does it depend.

According to the commentary, “knowledge and vision” in this passage signifies the[^p157-2] knowledge arising through insight (vipassanāñā5a). After emerging from the fourth jhāna, the yogin directs his attention to his body and mind. He first discerns the body, and sees it as material, compounded, dependently arisen, impermanent, subject to destruction. He then directs his attention to the mind, and sees the mind occuring in dependence on the body, sharing its conditioned, impermanent, and insubstantial nature. This knowledge of insight, brought to its apex, issues in the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers. A fuller account of insight-knowledge will be given in the next chapter.

The second auxiliary type of higher knowledge is the knowledge of the mind-created body. This knowledge seems similar to the iddhis, and is in fact called manomayiddhi, but it is not included in the iddhividhañā5a. The textual description reads:

With his mind thus concentrated…, he creates from this body another body which has material form, is mind-made, having all its major and minor parts,[^p157-3] not deficient in any sense organ. (Wr. tr.).

The Buddha compares the process by which a bhikkhu mentally creates another body resembling his own and draws it out from the original to the act by which a man draws a reed from its sheath, a sword from its scabbard, or a snake from its slough. In each case[^p157-4] the extracted article resembles its container but can be seen as clearly distinct from it. The Visuddhimagga explains that if a meditator wishes to create the mind-made body he should emerge from the basic fourth jhāna, advert to his own body, and resolve that his body be hollow. When it presents itself to him as hollow, he should do the preliminary work and then resolve: “Let there be another body inside it.” Another body then appears within his original body which he can draw out “like a reed from its sheath, like a sword[^p157-5] from its scabbard, like a snake from its slough.”

The Pa:isambhidāmagga describes one other supernormal power of the iddhi type not explicitly mentioned in the suttas, though implied by certain incidents. This is the supernormal power of transformation (vikubba5a iddhi). The Pa:isambhidāmagga exposition of this power reads:

He abandons his normal appearance and shows the appearance of a boy or the appearance of a Naga (serpent), or the appearance of a Supanna (winged demon), or the appearance of an Asura (demon), or the appearance of the Ruler [of Gods] (Indra), or the appearance of some [other sensual sphere] deity, or the appearance of a Brahmā, or the appearance of the sea, or the appearance of a rock or the appearance of a lion, or the appearance of a tiger, or the appearance of a leopard, or he shows an elephant, or he shows a horse, or he shows a chariot, or he shows a foot soldier, or he shows a manifold[^p158-1] military array.

To attain this power, according to the Visuddhimagga, the meditator should first resolve to appear in a particular form, such as the form of a boy. Then he should enter and emerge from the basic fourth jhāna and advert to his appearance in the form chosen. Again he should enter the jhāna, emerge, and resolve, “Let me be a boy, etc. of such and such a type.” Simultaneously with his resolution he appears as a boy or as anything else he chooses. However, it is not necessary for the meditator to effect the transformation on his own body. He can simply resolve upon showing some form, such as an elephant, a[^p158-2] horse, etc., and that form will become manifest before himself and others.

## The Jhānas and Rebirth

According to Buddhist doctrine the influence of the jhānas is not confined merely to this present existence but extends beyond to future lives, determining an individual’s destiny in the course of his movement through saṃsāra. The Buddha teaches that all sentient beings in whom ignorance (avijjā) and craving (ta5hā) remain present, even if only dormantly, are subject to rebirth. As long as there is a desire to go on existing in some form the process of existence will continue. The craving for existence lies at the hub of the wheel of becoming, sustaining its constant revolution.

The specific factor which determines the place and conditions of rebirth is kamma. Kamma is volitional action – deeds, words, and thoughts expressive of deliberate intention. Kammas are of two general kinds: unwholesome kammas (akusalakamma), which are actions rooted in greed, hatred, and delusion, and wholesome kammas (kusalakamma), which are actions rooted in non-greed, non-hatred, and non-delusion. Each kamma or intentional action that a person performs becomes accumulated in his mental continuum, where it remains as a force capable of producing results (vipāka) in the future. These results correspond to the ethical quality of the action: wholesome

kammas bring happiness and success, unwholesome kammas bring suffering and failure. In relation to the rebirth process, wholesome kammas issue in a good rebirth, unwholesome kammas in a bad one.

Of the many kammas a person performs and accumulates in the course of his lifetime, one kamma will come to the surface at the time of death to determine his state of rebirth. The kammas that take on this decisive role are ranked into grades of precedence. Priority is given to morally weighty kamma (garuka kamma), extremely powerful virtuous or evil deeds. Weighty virtuous deeds are the attainment of the jhānas; weighty evil deeds include patricide, matricide, killing an arahat, wounding a Buddha, and causing schism in the Sangha. Next in order come morally significant deeds performed near the time of[^p159-1] death, then habitual actions, and lastly, miscellaneous stored up kammas. Those kammas which do not actually generate rebirth can still produce their results in the course of a person’s life, either supporting, countering, or annihilating the effects of the rebirth-generative kamma.

According to Buddhist cosmology, there are many planes of existence where beings can take rebirth through their kamma. These planes are grouped into three general spheres: the sense sphere (kāmāvacarabhūmi), which is the field of rebirth for evil kammas and for non-jhānic meritorious kammas; the fine material sphere (rūpāvacarabhūmi), which is the field of rebirth for the fine material jhānas; and the immaterial sphere 2 (arūpāvacarabhūmi), which is the field of rebirth for the immaterial attainments.

If an unwholesome kamma becomes determinative of rebirth, it will produce rebirth in one of four planes: [1] the woeful state (niraya), which itself has many subdivisions; [2] the animal kingdom (tiracchānayoni): [3] the sphere of tormented spirits or “hungry ghosts” (pettivisaya); and [4] the host of titans (asurakāya). These four states are collectively called the plane of misery (apāyabhūmi), the bad destinations (duggati), and the downfall (vinipāta). If a wholesome kamma of a type below the level of mundane jhānas determines rebirth, it will produce rebirth in either the human world (manussaloka) or in one of the six sense sphere heavenly worlds, namely: (1] the realm of the four great kings (cātummahārājikadevaloka), [2] the realm of the thirty-three gods (tāvati.sa); [3] the realm of Yama gods (yāma); [4] the realm of delight (tusita); [5] the realm of gods who rejoice in their own creations (nimmānarati); and, [6] the realm of gods who lord over the creations of others (paranimmitavasavatti). These seven realms, the human world and the six heavenly worlds, together make up the sense sphere plane[^p159-3] of happiness (kāmāvacara sugatibhūmi).

Above the sense sphere realms are the fine material realms (rūpāvacarabhūmi). Rebirth into these realms is gained through the attainment of the four fine material jhānas, providing the jhāna is still retained at the time of death. There are altogether sixteen realms in the fine material plane. These are correlated with the four jhānas in a

systematic way. For each of the three lower jhānas there are three realms of rebirth, graded according to whether the jhāna was mastered to an inferior, middling, or superior degree; for the fourth jhāna the division is different, as we will see.

Those who have practiced the first jhāna to a minor degree are reborn in the realm of the retinue of Brahmā (brahmapārisajja), those who have practiced it to a moderate degree are reborn in the realm of the ministers of Brahmā (brahmapurohita), and those who have practiced it to a superior degree are reborn in the realm of the great Brahmā (mahābrahmā). Similarly, practicing the second jhāna to a minor degree brings rebirth in the realm of minor luster (parittābha), to a moderate degree rebirth in the realm of infinite luster (appamānābha), and to a superior degree in the realm of radiant luster (ābhassara). Again, practicing the third jhāna to a minor degree brings rebirth in the realm of minor aura (parittasubha), to a moderate degree in the realm of infinite aura (appamānasubha), and to a superior degree in the realm of steady aura (subhaki5hā).

Corresponding to the fourth jhāna there are seven realms: the realm of great reward (vehapphala), the realm of non-percipient beings (asaññasatta), and the five pure abodes (suddhāvāsa). With this jhāna the previous pattern is not observed. It seems that all beings who practice the fourth jhāna of the mundane level without reaching any supramundane attainment are reborn in the realm of great reward.

There is no differentiation by way of inferior, moderate, or superior grades of development. The realm of non-percipient beings is reached by those who attain the fourth jhāna and then use the power of their attainment to take rebirth with only material bodies; they do not acquire consciousness again until they pass away from this realm. The five pure abodes are called the durable realm (aviha), the serene realm (atappa), the beautiful realm (sudassi), the clear-sighted realm (sudassa), and the highest realm (akani((ha). These five realms are open only to non-returners (anāgāmis), noble disciples who have eradicated the fetters binding them to the sense sphere and thence automatically take rebirth in higher realms. From here they attain arahatship and reach final deliverance.

Beyond the fine material sphere lie the immaterial realms (arūpāvacarabhūmi). These are four in number – the base of boundless space, the base of boundless consciousness, the base of nothingness, and the base of neither perception nor non-perception. As should be evident, these are the realms of rebirth for those who, without having broken the fetters that bind them to saṃsāra, achieve and master the four immaterial jhānas. Those yogins who have mastery over these attainments at the time of death take rebirth in the appropriate plane, where they abide until the kammic force of the jhāna is exhausted. Then they pass away, to take rebirth in some other realm as determined by[^p160-1] their accumulated kamma.

[^p129-1]: In Pāli: ākāsānañcāyatana, viññāṇañcāyatana, ākiñcaññāyatana, and nevesaññānāsaññāyatana.
[^p130-1]: Dhs., p. 145.
[^p130-2]: DN. 3:275.
[^p130-3]: “Santā vimokkhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā,” MN. 1:33. “Santā vihārā.” MN. 1:41.
[^p130-4]: Dhs., pp. 68-69. Vibh., p. 276.
[^p131-1]: PP., p. 354. “Dissante kho pana rūpādhikaranaJ daLYādāna satthādāna kaXaha viggaha vivāda, n’atthi kho pan’etaJ sabbaso ārūpeti: so iti patisañcikkhāya rūpānaJ yeva nibbidāya, virāgāya, nirodhāya pa:ipanno hoti.” MN. 1:410.
[^p131-2]: See above, Chapter II, p. 42.
[^p131-3]: PP., pp. 354-55. Vism., p. 272.
[^p132-1]: PP., p. 355. Vism., p. 272.
[^p132-2]: Ibid.
[^p132-3]: PP., p. 355. Vism., p. 272.
[^p132-4]: PP., p. 356. Vism., p. 272.
[^p133-1]: PP., p. 356. “Sabbaso rūpasaññānaJ samatikkamā pa:ighasaññānaJ atthagamā nānatta saññānaJ amanasikārā ananto ākāsoti àkāsānañcāyatanaJ upasampajja viharati.” DN. 1:183.
[^p133-2]: PP., p. 357. “RūpāvacarasamāpattiJ samāpannassa vā upapannassa vā di::hadhammasukhavihārissa vā saññā sañjānanā sañjānitattaJ.” Vibh., p. 272.
[^p133-3]: PP., pp. 357-58. Vism., p. 273.
[^p134-1]: PP., p. 358. “Tattha katamā pa:ighasaññā? Rūpasaññā, saddasaññā, gandhasaññā, rasasaññā, pho::abbasaññā. Imā vuccanti pa:ighasaññāyo.” Vibh., p. 272.
[^p134-2]: PP., p. 358. “TāsaJ kusalavipākānaJ pañcannaJ, akusalavipākānaJ pañcannaJ ti sabbaso dasannaJ pi pa:ighasaññānaJ atthangamā pahānā asamuppādā; appavattiJ katvāti vuttaJ hoti.” Vism., p. 274.
[^p134-3]: PP., p. 358. Vism., p. 274.
[^p134-4]: “Asamāpannassa manodhātu samaKgissa vā mano viññāLadhātu samaKgissa vā saññā, sañjānanā, san- jānitattaJ.” Vibh., p. 272.
[^p135-1]: PP., p. 359. Vism., p. 274.
[^p135-2]: PP., p. 359. Vism., p. 275.
[^p135-3]: PP., p. 360. Vism., p. 275.
[^p135-4]: PP., p. 361. “Sabbaso ākāsānañcāyatanaJ samatikkamā, anantaJ viññāLaJ ti viññāLañcāyatanaJ upasampajja viharati.” Vism., p. 254.
[^p136-1]: PP., p. 361. “AnantaJ viññāLanti taJyeva ākāsaJ viññāLena phutaJ manasikaroti anantaJ pharati. Tena vuccati anantaJ viññāLanti.” Vibh., p. 273.
[^p136-2]: PP., p. 362. “AnantaJ pharati, taJ yeva ākāsaJ phu:aJ viññāLaJ manasikarotī ti vuttaJ hoti.” Vism., p. 276.
[^p136-3]: PP., p. 362. “Tass’eva viññāLañcāyatanārammaLabhūtassa ākāsānañcāyatanaviññāLassa abhāvo, suññatā, vivittākāro manasikātabbo.” Vism., p. 277.
[^p137-1]: PP., p. 363. ‘’Yathā nāma puriso maLYalamālādīsu kenacid eva karaLīyena sannipatitaJ bhikkhu- sanghaJ disvā katthaci gantvā sannipātakiccāvasāne u::hāya pakkantesu bhikkhūsu āgantvā dvāre:hatvā puna taJ:hānaJ olokento suññaJ eva passati, vivittaJ eva passati, nāssa evaJ hoti, ettakā nāma bhikkhū kālaJkatā vā, disāpakkantā vā ti, atha kho, suññaJ idaJ vivittaK ti natthibhāvaJ eva passati, evaJ eva pubbe ākāse pavattitaviññāLaJ viññāLañcāyatanajjānacakkhunā passanto viharitvā, n’atthi n’atthī ti ādinā parikammamanasikārena antarahite tasmiJ viññāLe tassa apagamanasankhātaJ abhāvaJ eva passanto viharati.” Vism., p. 277.
[^p137-2]: PP., p. 363. “Sabbaso viññānañcāyatanaJ samatikkamma, n’atthi kiñci ti ākiñcaññāyatanaJ upasam- pajja viharati ti.” Vibh., p. 254.
[^p137-3]: PP., pp. 363-64. Vism., p. 278.
[^p137-4]: PP., p. 364. Vism., p. 272.
[^p138-1]: PP., p. 364. Vism., p. 278.
[^p138-2]: PP., p. 265. “Saññā rogo, saññā gaLYo, saññā sallaJ… etaJ santaJ, etaJ panītaJ yadidaJ nevasaññā- nāsaññā ti.” MN. 2:231.
[^p138-3]: PP., p. 365. “Sabbaso ākiñcaññāyatanaJ samatikkamma nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaJ upasampajja viha- ratī ti.” Vibh., p. 254.
[^p138-4]: PP., p. 366. “TaJ yeva ākiñcaññāyatanaJ santato manasikaroti. Vibh., p. 274.
[^p139-1]: PP., p. 366. Vism., p. 280.
[^p139-2]: PP., p. 367. Vism., p. 280.
[^p139-3]: PP., pp. 367-68. Vism., p. 281.
[^p140-1]: “YasmiJ samaye arūpūpapattiyā maggaJ bhāveti sabbaso rūpasaññānaJ samatikkamā pa:ighasaññānaJ atthaLgamānānattasaññānaJ amanasikārā ākāsānañcāyatanasaññāsahagataJ sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassa domanassānaJ atthaKgamā upekkhā satipārisuddhiJ catutthaJ jhānaJ upasampajja viharati upekkhāsahagataJ.” Dhs., p. 68.
[^p141-1]: PP., pp. 369-70. Vism., p. 282.
[^p142-1]: PP., pp. 370-71. Vism., p. 283.
[^p142-2]: PP., p. 371. Vism., p. 283.
[^p142-3]: PP., p. 409. “So evaJ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anangane vigatūpakkilese, mudubhūte kammaniye:hite āneñjappatte…” DN. 1:76.
[^p142-4]: AN. 1:163-65.
[^p143-1]: SN. 2:2l6.
[^p143-2]: DN. 3:281.
[^p143-3]: Ibid. 1:76-77.
[^p143-4]: “Ettāvatā cesa rūpajjhānalābhiyo na arūpajjhānalābhiti na veditabbo. Na hi a::hasu samāpattīsu cuddasahākārehi ciLLavasibhāvaJ vinā upari abhiññādhigamo hoti. PāliyaJ pana rūpajjhānāniyeva āgatāni. Arūpajjhānāni āharitvā kathetabbāni.” DN.A. 1:196.
[^p144-1]: “SvāyaJ nayo arūpasamāpattīhi vinā na ijjhatīti tāyapettha avinābhāvo veditabbo. Yadi evaJ kasmā pāliyaJ na arūpajjhānāni āgatāni? Visesato ca rūpāvacaracatutthajjhānapādakattā sabbābhiññānaJ tadantogadhā katvā tayā desitā; na arūpāvacarajjhānaJ idha anupayogato; tenāha: ‘ArūpajjhānaJ āharitvā kathetabbāni ÑāLābhivaJsa, [Dīgha Nikāya Abhinava)īkā] Sādhuvilāsinī Nāma Sīlakkhandhavagga Abhinava(īkā, [Pāli Text in Burmese script].2 vols. (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1961), 2:142.
[^p144-2]: “Rūpa virāga bhāvanā vasena pavattaJ catubbhidhampi arūpajjhānaJ catutthajjhānasaKgahamevāti āha ‘cattāri jhānāniti”’ Sāriputta Thera, [Samantapāsādikā Vinayaṭṭhakathā)īkā] Sāratthadīpanī(īkā, [Pāli Text in Burmese script].3 vols. (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1960), 1:380.
[^p144-3]: PP., pp. 410-11. Vism., pp. 314-15.
[^p145-1]: PP., pp. 421-22. Vism., p. 324.
[^p145-2]: PP., p. 414. “Iddhividhāya cittaJ abhinīharati abhinnāmeti.” DN. 1:77-78.
[^p146-1]: PP., pp. 409, 420. Vism., pp. 315, 323. DN. 1:77.
[^p146-2]: PP., pp. 420-27. Vism., pp. 323-28.
[^p147-1]: BMTP., p. 436. “Idha so iddhimā ceto vasippatto… candimasuriye āvajjati āvajjitvā ñāLena adhi::hāti ‘hatthapāse hotūti’. So nisinnako vā nipannako vā candimasuriye pāLinā āmasati parāmasati parimajjati.” Pts., p. 387.
[^p147-2]: PP., p. 435. Vism., p. 335.
[^p148-1]: BMTP., pp. 437-38. Pts. pp. 387-88.
[^p148-2]: PP., pp. 441-43. Vism., pp. 331-32.
[^p148-3]: AN. 3:280-81.
[^p149-1]: Vinp. 2:112.
[^p149-2]: SN. 4:269.
[^p149-3]: DN. 1:212-15. Pts., pp. 401-404.
[^p149-4]: Pts., p. 402.
[^p149-5]: DN. 1:214-15.
[^p149-6]: Ibid. 1:2l3-14.
[^p149-7]: Pts., pp. 401-404.
[^p150-1]: PP., pp. 446-47. Vism., p. 343.
[^p150-2]: PP., p. 446. “… dibbāya sota-dhātuyā cittaJ abhinīharati abhininnāmeti. So dibbāya sotadhātuyā visuddhāya atikkanta-mānusikāya ubho sadde suLāti, dibbe ca mānuse ca, ye dūre santike ca.” DN. 1:79.
[^p150-3]: PP., p. 446. Vism., p. 343.
[^p151-1]: BMTP., pp. 445-46. “So evaJ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaKgane vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye:hite ānejjappatte ceto pariyañāLāya cittaJ abhinīharati abhininnāmeti. So parasattānaJ parapuggalānaJ cetasā ceto paricca pajānāti – sarāgaJ vā cittaJ sarāgaJ cittaJ ti pajānāti, vītarāgaJ vā cittaJ vīta rāgaJ cittaJ ti pajānāti, sadosaJ… sadosaJ…, vīta dosaJ… vītadosaJ…, samohaJ… samohaJ…, saJkhittaJ vā… saJkhittaJ…, vikkhittaJ vā… vikkhittaJ…, mahaggataJ vā… mahaggataJ…, amahaggataJ vā… amahaggataJ…, sa-uttaraJ vā… sa-uttaraJ…, anuttaraJ vā… anuttaraJ…, samāhitaJ… samāhitaJ…, asamāhitaJ vā… asamāhitaJ…, vimuttaJ vā cittaJ vimuttaJ cittaJ ti pajānāti, avimuttaJ vā cittaJ avimuttaJ cittaJ ti pajānāti.” DN. 1:79-80
[^p151-2]: PP., p. 449. Vism., pp. 344-45.
[^p152-1]: PP., p. 473. Vism., p. 364.
[^p152-2]: BMTP., pp. 447-48. DN. 1:81.
[^p152-3]: PP., p. 451. Vism., p. 346.
[^p152-4]: PP., p. 452. Vism. p. 346.
[^p153-1]: PP., pp. 453-55. Vism., pp. 347-49.
[^p153-2]: DN. 1:81-82.
[^p153-3]: BMTP., p. 451. DN. 1:82.
[^p154-1]: PP., pp. 465-66. Vism., p. 358.
[^p154-2]: PP., pp. 471, 477-78. Vism., pp. 363, 367-68.
[^p155-1]: Dhs., p. 221.
[^p155-2]: “So evaJ samāhite citte… āsavānaJ khaya-ñāLāya cittaJ abbhinīharati abhininnāmeti. So ’idaJ dukkhan’ti yatthābhūtaJ pajānāti, ’ayaJ dukkha-samudayo’ti yatthābhūtaJ pajānāti, ’ayaJ dukkha- nirodho’ti yathā-bhūtaJ pajānāti, ’ayaJ dukkhanirodhagāminī pa:ipadā’ti yathā bhūtaJ pajānāti, ’ime āsavā’ ti yathābhūtaJ pajānāti, ’ayaJ āsavasamudayo’ti yathābhūtaJ pajānāti, ’ayaJ āsavanirodho’ti yathābhūtaJ pajānāti, ’ayaJ āsavanirodhagāminīpa:ipadā’ti yathābhūtaJ pajānāti. Tassa evaJ jānato evaJ passato kāmāsavā pi cittaJ vimuccati bhavāsavā pi cittaJ vimuccati avijjāsavā pi cittaJ vimuccati, ’vimuttasmim vimuttaJ’ ti ñāLaJ hoti, ’khīnā jāti vusitaJ brahmacariyaJ kataJ karaLīyaJ nāparaJ itthattāyā’ti pajānāti.” DN. 1:83-84.
[^p155-3]: DN.A. 1:200-201.
[^p156-1]: DN. 1:76-77. MN. 2:l7-18.
[^p157-1]: Dial. 1:86-87. “So evaJ samāhite citte… ñāLadassanāya cittaJ abhinīharati abhininnāmeti. So evaJ pajānāti: ‘AyaJ kho me kāyo rūpī cātummahābhūtiko mātāpettikasambhavo odānakummāsupacayo aniccucchādanaparimaddanabhedanaviddhaJsanadhammo, idaJ ca pana me viññāLaJ ettha sitaJ ettha pa:ibaddhaJ’ ti.” DN. 1:76.
[^p157-2]: DN.A. 1:197.
[^p157-3]: “So evaJ samāhite citte… So imamhā kāyā aññaJ kāyaJ abhinimmināti rūpiJ manomayaJ sabbaLgapaccangiJ ahīnindriyaJ.” DN. 1:77.
[^p157-4]: Ibid.
[^p157-5]: PP., p. 444. Vism., p. 342.
[^p158-1]: PP., p. 444. Vism., p. 342. Pts., p. 388.
[^p158-2]: PP., p. 444. Vism., p. 342.
[^p159-1]: Narada, Manual., pp. 259-62.
[^p159-2]: For a good synopsis of Buddhist cosmology and its connection with rebirth, see Ibid., pp. 233-55.
[^p159-3]: Ibid., pp. 233, 236-39.
[^p160-1]: For a schematic diagram of the planes of Buddhist cosmology and their connection with kamma, see Appendix 5.
