The goal of the Buddhist path is not a temporary appeasement of mental affliction but complete and permanent liberation from suffering. To facilitate the achievement of this goal the Buddha has divided his path into three stages of training – moral discipline (sīla) concentration (samādhi), and wisdom (paññā). Each stage in this triad serves as the foundation for the next and the entire set as the foundation for deliverance:

Such is moral discipline, such is concentration, such is wisdom. Concentration supported by moral discipline brings great benefit and fruit, wisdom supported by concentration brings great benefit and fruit. The mind supported by wisdom is completely liberated from the cankers – from the canker of sensual desire, the canker of existence, the canker of views, and the canker of[^p161-1] ignorance. (Wr. tr.).

The mundane jhānas, comprising the four fine material jhānas and four immaterial jhānas, pertain to the stage of concentration. As such they form an important part of the training. However, taken by themselves, the jhānas do not suffice to ensure complete deliverance from suffering. They lead a long part of the way to the goal, but to attain the final cessation of suffering they must ultimately be supplemented and fulfilled by the final stage of practice, the training in wisdom.

In the present chapter we will examine the nature of wisdom and the methods by which it is cultivated. Beginning with a general explanation of wisdom and its function in the framework of the Buddhist path, we then move on to discuss the course laid down for its development. The basis for our discussion will be the seven purifications (sattavisuddhi), the principal categorical system used by the Theravāda tradition to treat the stages in the unfolding of wisdom. Since wisdom presupposes a certain proficiency in concentration it is inevitable that jhāna comes to claim a place in its development. This place, however, is not fixed and invariable, but as we will see allows for wide differences depending on the individual meditator’s disposition.

Fundamental to the discussion in this chapter and the next is a distinction between two terms crucial to Theravāda philosophical exposition. These two terms are “mundane” (lokiya) and “supramundane” (lokuttara). The term “mundane” applies to all phenomena comprised in the world (loka) of the five aggregates of clinging (pañcupādānakkhandhā) – material form, feeling, perception, mental formations, and consciousness. It covers subtle states of consciousness as well as material and emotional states, virtue as well as evil, meditative attainments as well as sensual engrossments.

The term “supramundane”, in contrast, applies exclusively to that which transcends the world of the clinging-aggregates. It covers nine terms, the nine lokuttarā dhammā: nibbāna, the four noble paths (magga) leading to nibbāna, and their corresponding four fruits (phala) which experience the bliss of nibbāna. It is hoped that the discussion to follow will make the meanings of these terms clear.

## The Nature of Wisdom

The reason the mundane jhānas cannot by themselves bring final liberation from suffering is because they are incapable of cutting off the causes of suffering. The Buddha teaches that the fundamental source of suffering, the driving power behind the cycle of rebirths, is the defilements (kilesa), principally the three unwholesome roots of greed, hatred, and delusion. Concentration of the absorptive level, no matter how deeply it might be developed, only leads to a suspension of the defilements, not to their radical elimination. As we saw earlier, concentration whether access or jhāna, abandons the[^p162-1] hindrances solely by way of suppression (vikkhambanappahāna). Even at its deepest it cannot effect the more fundamental abandonment required for liberation, namely, the[^p162-2] abandonment by eradication (samuccnedappahāna).

Because it cannot dismantle the latent seeds of the defilements, bare mundane jhāna does not figure as a sufficient attainment in the Buddhist map of the liberating path. Mundane jhāna suffers from two conspicuous defects. Firstly, if not persisted in, it can be lost. Through carelessness or complacency a yogin can again be overpowered by the force of the defilements, thereby falling away from jhāna and the rest of his spiritual training. Thus the Venerable Mahāko::hita describes the case of a monk who attains the four jhānas, and thinking to himself complacently “I have won the four jhānas”

… keeps company with monks, nuns, lay-disciples, men and women, rajahs, their ministers, course-setters or their disciples. Living in company, untrammelled, rude, given over to gossip, passion corrupts his heart; and with his heart corrupted by passion, he disavows the training and returns to the[^p162-3] lower life.

The second defect which besets the jhānas is that bare mundane jhāna, even when sustained, does not by itself terminate the cycle of rebirths. To the the contrary, it even perpetuates the round in its own way. For each fine material and immaterial jhāna attained, if held to with delight and clinging, brings about a rebirth in that particular plane of existence corresponding to its own kammic potency, which can then be followed

by a rebirth in some lower realm when the generative kamma of the jhāna is exhausted. As the Buddha says:

Now, monks, a certain person here, aloof from sense-desires, aloof from evil conditions, enters upon the first musing [jhāna], which is accompanied by thought directed and sustained, born of seclusion, zestful and easeful, and abides therein. He enjoys its sweetness, longs for it and finds happiness therein. Established therein, given thereto, generally spending his time therein and not falling away therefrom, when he makes an end he is reborn in the company of devas of the Brahma-group. A kalpa, monks, is the life-span of the devas of the Brahma-group. Therein the ordinary man stays and spends his time according to the life-span of those devas; then he goes to purgatory or the[^p163-1] womb of an animal, he goes to the peta-realm.

The same pattern is repeated for each of the higher attainments. i.e., the remaining[^p163-2] jhānas and the āruppas.

What is required to achieve complete deliverance from the cycle of rebirths is the eradication of the unwholesome roots of greed, hatred, and delusion. Since the most basic of these roots is delusion (moha), also called ignorance (avijjā), the key to liberation lies in the eradication of ignorance by developing its direct opposite, namely wisdom (paññā). For this reason the Buddha places wisdom at the head of all the spiritual faculties. It appears among the groups of training factors as the basis for success consisting in inquiry (vīmaṃsā-iddhipāda), the faculty of wisdom (paññindriya), the power of wisdom (paññābala), the investigation of phenomena enlightenment factor (dhammavicaya sambojjhaṅga), and right view (sammādiṭṭhi) of the Noble Eightfold Path. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi in its definition of the faculty of wisdom spells out a whole list of equivalent terms, which testifies to its importance and the unrivalled esteem in which it is held:

The wisdom which there is on that occasion is understanding, search, research, searching the truth, discernment, discrimination, differentiation, erudition, proficiency, subtlety, criticism, reflection, analysis, breadth, sagacity, leading, insight, intelligence, incitement, wisdom as faculty, wisdom as power, wisdom as a sword, wisdom as a height, wisdom as light, wisdom as glory, wisdom as splendour, wisdom as a precious stone, the absence of dullness, searching the[^p163-3] Truth, right views, – this is the wisdom that there then is.

1 An analytical exposition of wisdom found in the Visuddhimagga discusses wisdom under six headings: [1] the definition of wisdom; [2] the sense in which it is called wisdom; [3] its characteristic, function, manifestation, and proximate cause; [4] its classification; [5] method of development; and [6] its benefits. A brief consideration of these principles should help bring the nature of wisdom to light.

[1] Wisdom, according to Buddhaghosa, is defined as insight knowledge associated with[^p164-2] wholesome states of consciousness.

[2] Wisdom (paññā) is so called in the sense that it is an act of understanding (pajānana). It is a mode of knowing (jānana) distinct from and superior to the modes of perceiving (sañjānana) and cognizing (vijānana). What distinguishes wisdom from these other forms of cognition is its ability to comprehend the characteristics of impermanence, suffering, and selflessness and thereby to bring about the manifestation[^p164-3] of the supramundane path.

4 [3] Wisdom has the specific characteristic of penetrating the true nature of phenomena. Each phenomenon possesses its own particular characteristic as well as the general characteristics common to all phenomena. The particular and general characteristics together make up the “true nature” (sabhāva) of phenomena. Wisdom is the penetration of this nature through direct, unmediated cognition. Its function is “to abolish the darkness of delusion which conceals the individual essences of states” and its manifestation is “non-delusion.” Since the Buddha says that one whose mind is concentrated knows and sees things as they are, the proximate cause of wisdom is[^p164-5] concentration.

[4] The wisdom instrumental in attaining liberation is divided into two principal types: insight-knowledge (vipassanā-ñā5a) and the knowledge pertaining to the supramundane paths (magga-ñā5a). The first is the direct penetration of the three characteristics of conditioned phenomena – impermanence (aniccatā), suffering (dukkhatā), and selflessness (anattatā). It takes as its objective sphere the groups of mental phenomena constituting individual existence, i.e. the five aggregates (pañcakkhandhā) of material[^p164-6] form, feeling, perception, mental formations, and consciousness. Because insightknowledge takes the world (loka) of conditioned formations (sa/khāra) as its object it is regarded as a mundane (lokiya) form of wisdom. Insight-knowledge does not itself

directly eradicate the defilements. It serves to prepare the way for the second type of wisdom, the wisdom of the supramundane paths, which emerges when insight has been brought to its climax. The wisdom of the path, occurring in the four distinct stages of the supramundane Noble Eightfold Path (to be discussed below), simultaneously realizes nibbāna, fathoms the Four Noble Truths, and cuts off the defilements. This wisdom is called “supramundane” (lokuttara) because it rises up (uttarati) from the world (loka) of the five aggregates to realize the state transcendent to the world, nibbāna.

[5] The Buddhist yogin, striving for deliverance, begins the development of wisdom by first securely establishing its roots – purified moral discipline and concentration. He then learns and masters the basic material upon which wisdom is to work – the aggregates, elements, sense bases, dependent arising, the Four Noble Truths, etc. He commences the actual practice of wisdom by cultivating insight into the impermanence, suffering, and selflessness of the five aggregates. When this insight reaches its apex it issues in supramundane wisdom, the right view factor of the Noble Eightfold Path. The wisdom of the path turns from conditioned formations to the unconditioned nibbāna, destroying thereby the latent defilements at their root.

[6] The removal of the defilements, the experiencing of nibbāna, and the achievement of the states of holiness culminating in arahatship – these, according to Buddhaghosa, are[^p165-1] the benefits in developing wisdom.

## The Two Vehicles

The Theravāda tradition recognizes two alternative approaches to the development of wisdom, between which yogins are free to choose according to their aptitude and propensity. These two approaches are the vehicle of serenity (samathayāna) and the vehicle of insight (vipassanayāna). The meditators who follow them are called, respectively, the samathayānika, “one who makes serenity his vehicle,” and the vipassanāyānika, “one who makes insight his vehicle.” Since both vehicles, despite their names, are approaches to developing insight, to prevent misunderstanding the latter type of meditator is sometimes called a suddhavipassanāyānika, “one who makes bare insight his vehicle,” or a sukkhavipassaka, “a dry insight worker.” Though all three terms appear initially in the commentaries rather than in the sutras, the recognition of the two vehicles seems implicit in a number of canonical passages.

The samathayānika is a meditator who first attains access concentration or one of the eight mundane jhānas, then emerges and uses his attainment as a basis for cultivating insight until he arrives at the supramundane path. The experience of the path in any of its four stages always occurs at a level of jhānic intensity and thus necessarily includes supramundane jhāna under the heading of right concentration (sammāsamādhi), the eighth factor of the Noble Eightfold Path. In contrast to the samathayānika, the vipassanāyānika does not attain mundane jhāna prior to practicing insight-contemplation, or if he does, does not use it as an instrument for cultivating insight. Instead,

without entering and emerging from jhāna, he proceeds directly to insight-contemplation on the mental and material phenomena that appear in the six spheres of sense experience – the five outer senses and thought. By means of this bare insight he reaches the noble path, which as in the former case again includes supramundane jhāna as a matter of necessity.

The kingpost of the vipassanāyānika’s approach is the practice of mindfulness (sati), the bare non-discursive observation of the changing phenomena of mind and body. The Buddha expounds the practice of mindfulness in terms of four contemplations – the contemplation of body (kāya), feelings (vedanā), states of mind (citta), and mind-objects (dhamma). These four contemplations, the four “foundations of mindfulness” (satipaṭṭhāna), bring to the focus of the observational field the diverse classes of mental and material phenomena with their universal marks of impermanence, suffering, and selflessness. The samathayānika, too, at the time he emerges from jhāna and begins insight-contemplation, has to practice the four foundations of mindfulness, as these have been called by the Buddha “the only way that leads to the attainment of purity, to the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, to the end of pain and grief, to the entering upon[^p166-1] the right path and the realization of Nibbāna.”

The classical source for the distinction between the two vehicles of serenity and insight is the Visuddhimagga, where it is explained that when a meditator begins the development of wisdom

… if, firstly, his vehicle is serenity, [he] should emerge from any fine material or immaterial jhāna except the base consisting of neither perception nor non-perception, and he should discern, according to characteristic, function, etc. the jhāna factors consisting of applied thought, etc. and the states[^p166-2] associated with them.

The meditator whose vehicle is pure insight, on the other hand, is advised to begin by discerning material and mental phenomena directly, without utilizing a jhāna for this[^p166-3] purpose.

A contemporary meditation master, the Venerable Mahāsī Sayadaw, draws the distinction between the two types of meditators in more general terms:

A person who, of these two, has first developed tranquility, and after having established himself in either access concentration or full concentration, subsequently contemplates the five groups of grasping, is called a samathayānika, i.e. one who has tranquility as his vehicle… He, however, who

has neither produced access concentration nor full concentration, but from the very start applies insight to the five groups of grasping, is called a[^p167-1] suddhavipassanāyānika, i.e. one who has pure insight as his vehicle.

This second type of meditator is sometimes referred to by another name, sukkhavipassaka or “dry insight worker,” which the commentary to the Visuddhimagga explains in a way that accentuates his lack of jhāna:

The dry insight worker is one who does not obtain [mundane] jhāna, but makes pure insight his vehicle. He is called a “dry insight worker” because his insight is dry and rough, as this insight has not been moistened with the[^p167-2] moisture of jhāna. (Wr. tr.).

Although, as we mentioned earlier, the three terms – samathayānika, vipassanāyānika, and sukkhavipassaka – are terms of commentarial coinage, the distinction of vehicles and practitioners seems to draw directly from the Pāli Canon. The Buddha generally includes the four jhānas in complete expositions of his system of training, placing them before the development of insight and the attainment of the path, but a number of suttas give evidence for alternative approaches to the practice. In the Aṅguttara Nikāya the Buddha states:

There is, monks, one person who gains internal serenity of mind but does not gain the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena;… one person who gains the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena but does not gain internal serenity of mind;… one person who gains neither;… and one person who[^p167-3] gains both… (Wr. tr.).

He urges the first, established on his serenity of mind, to strive to gain the wisdom of insight into phenomena, and the second, established on his wisdom or insight into phenomena, to strive to gain serenity of mind. The commentary explains “serenity of mind” as mental concentration of absorption (appanācittasamādhi) and the “higher wisdom of insight into phenomena” as the insight-knowledge discerning formations 4 (sa/khārapariggahavipassanāñā5a), i.e. insight into the five aggregates. The fact that individuals are capable of one attainment in the absence of the other provides a starting point for a differentiation of vehicles adapted to their differing capacities. In the end,

however, all meditators have to enter upon the development of insight in order to reach the liberating path.

An even clearer enunciation of alternative vehicles to the goal is presented in a sutta spoken by the Venerable Ānanda. On one occasion Ānanda declared to a group of monks that there are some monks who develop insight preceded by serenity (samathapubba/gama. vipassana.) and some who develop serenity preceded by insight (vipassanāpubba/gama. samatha.). Both approaches, in his account, issue in the supramundane path:

Herein, your reverences, a monk develops insight preceded by calm. In him thus developing insight preceded by calm is born the Way. He follows along that Way, makes it grow, makes much of it. In him following, developing, making much of that Way, the fetters are abandoned, the lurking tendencies come to an end. Or again, your reverences, a monk develops calm preceded by insight. In him developing calm preceded by insight is born the Way. He[^p168-1] follows along that Way, makes it grow,… come to an end.

The commentarial exegesis of this passage (found in the Majjhima Nikāya commentary) explains the procedure for developing insight preceded by serenity thus:

Here, someone first produces access concentration or absorption concentration; this is serenity. He contemplates with insight that serenity and its concomitant phenomena as impermanent, etc.; this is insight. Thus first comes[^p168-2] serenity, afterwards insight. (Wr. tr.).

The procedure for developing serenity preceded by insight is described as follows:

Here, someone contemplates with insight the five aggregates of clinging as impermanent, etc. without having produced the aforesaid kinds of serenity (access and absorption); this is insight. With the completion of insight there arises in him mental one-pointedness having as object the renunciation of the phenomena produced therein; this is serenity. Thus first comes insight,[^p168-3] afterwards serenity. (Wr. tr.).

In case it should be suspected that the second type of meditator still attains mundane jhāna after developing insight, the subcommentary to the passage points out: “the mental one-pointedness he gains is right concentration of the supramundane path

1 (maggasammāsamādhi) and its object, called ‘renunciation’ (vavassagga), is nibbāna.” (Wr. tr.). The Aṅguttara subcommentary explicitly identifies the second meditator with the vipassanāyānika: “‘He develops serenity preceded by insight’: this is said with[^p169-2] reference to the vipassanāyānika.” (Wr. tr.).

Thus the samathayānika attains in order first access concentration or mundane jhāna and then insight-knowledge, by means of which he reaches the supramundane path containing wisdom under the heading of right view (sammādiṭṭhi) and supramundane jhāna under the heading of right concentration (sammāsamādhi). The vipassanāyānika, in contrast, skips over mundane jhāna and goes directly into insight-contemplation. When he reaches the end of the progression of insight-knowledge he arrives at the supramundane path which, as in the previous case, brings together wisdom with supramundane jhāna. This jhāna counts as his accomplishment of serenity.

## The Functions of Jhāna

For a meditator following the vehicle of serenity the attainment of jhāna fulfills two functions: first, it produces a basis of mental purity and inner collectedness needed for undertaking the work of insight-contemplation; and second, it serves as an object for the yogin to examine with insight in order to discern the three characteristics of impermanence, suffering, and selflessness. Jhāna accomplishes the first function by providing a powerful instrument for overcoming the five hindrances, the defilements of sensual desire, ill will, sloth and torpor, restlessness and worry, and doubt. As we saw, the Buddha declares these five hindrances to be corruptions of the mind and weakeners of wisdom which prevent a man from seeing things as they are, cause blindness and[^p169-3] ignorance, destroy wisdom, lead to vexation, and distract from nibbāna. For wisdom to arise the mind must first be concentrated well, and to be concentrated it must be freed from the obscuring influence of the hindrances. This task is accomplished by the attainment of jhāna: access concentration causes the hindrances to subside, the first and following jhānas drive them further and further away. Cleared of the hindrances the mind becomes “pliant and supple, having radiant lucidity and firmness, and will[^p169-4] concentrate well upon the eradication of the taints.” Therefore the jhānas are recommended as a means to provide the concentration and mental purification needed to cultivate wisdom.

In their capacity for producing concentration the jhānas are called the basis (pāda) for insight, and that particular jhāna a yogin enters and emerges from before commencing his practice of insight is designated the pādakajjhāna, the basic or foundational jhāna.

Insight cannot be practiced while absorbed in jhāna, since insight-meditation requires analysis, investigation, and observation, all of which are impossible when the thought faculty is immersed in one-pointed absorption. But after emerging from the jhāna the mind is cleared of the hindrances, and the stillness and clarity that then result conduce to precise, penetrating insight.

The jhānas also enter into the samathayānika’s practice in a second capacity; that is, as objects for scrutinization by insight. The practice of insight consists essentially in the examination of mental and physical phenomena to discover their marks of impermanence (aniccatā), suffering (dukkhatā), and selflessness (anattatā). The jhānas a yogin has attained and emerged from provide him with a readily available and strikingly clear object in which to seek out the three characteristics. After emerging from a jhāna the meditator will proceed to examine the jhānic consciousness, analyzing it into its components, defining them in their precise particularity, and discerning the way they exemplify the three universal marks. This process is called sammasanañā5a, “comprehension-knowledge,” and the jhāna subjected to such a treatment is termed the[^p170-1] sammasitajjhāna, “the comprehended jhāna.” Though the basic jhāna and the comprehended jhāna will often be the same, the two do not necessarily coincide. A yogin cannot practice comprehension on a jhāna higher than he is capable of attaining, but a yogin who uses a higher jhāna as his pādakajjhāna can still practice insightcomprehension on lower jhānas he has previously attained and mastered. This admitted difference in nature between the pādaka and sammasitajjhānas leads to discrepant[^p170-2] theories about the supramundane concentration of the noble path, as we will see below.

In the Aṅguttara Nikāya the Buddha shows how arahatship, “the destruction of the cankers,” is attained by a samathayānika yogin who attains a basic jhāna and after emerging from it makes that same jhāna the object of insight-comprehension:

I say, monks, that the destruction of the cankers occurs in dependence on the first jhāna. With reference to what is this said? Here, monks, a monk enters and abides in the first jhāna… Whatever is contained there belonging to material form, feeling, perception, mental formations, and consciousness – he contemplates these phenomena as impermanent, suffering, a disease, a boil, a dart, as misery, affliction, alien, disintegrating, empty, and selfless. He turns his mind away from those phenomena and focusses it on the deathless[^p170-3] element… Standing upon that he reaches the destruction of the cankers. (Wr. tr.).

In entering the first jhāna before commencing insight, the meditator makes it his basic or foundational jhāna; in contemplating its factors as impermanent, suffering, and selfless (which comprise all the other terms of contemplation) he makes the first jhāna his object of insight-comprehension. The Buddha repeats the same procedure, with appropriate modifications, for the remaining fine material jhānas and the lower three immaterial jhānas; for the last immaterial jhāna and the attainment of cessation a variant method is used, as these two states due to their subtlety do not come directly into the range of insight-contemplation.

Whereas the sequence of training undertaken by the samathayānika meditator is evident and unproblematic, a difficulty seems to crop up in the case of the vipassanāyānika’s approach. This difficulty lies in accounting for the concentration he uses to provide a basis for insight. Concentration is needed in order to see and know things as they are. The standard order of practice repeated countless times throughout the canon is moral discipline, concentration, and wisdom, with concentration declared to be the foundation for wisdom. The Buddha calls concentration the supporting condition (upanisā) for “the knowledge and vision of things as they really are,” while “one who lacks right concentration is deprived of the supporting condition for knowledge and vision of things[^p171-1] as they are.” (Wr. tr.). Finally, in the sequence of the seven purifications through which all yogins must pass, the second purification – purification of mind (cittavisuddhi) – is shown to precede and support the five subsequent purifications that begin with[^p171-2] purification of view (diṭṭhivisuddhi). Purification of mind is generally defined as access and absorption concentration, and the last five purifications as the wisdom of insight and the path. Since each purification has to be fulfilled in due order before undertaking the next, the same problem surfaces of accounting for the concentration the vipassanāyānika uses to arrive at insight.

The solution to this problem is found in a type of concentration distinct from the access and absorption concentrations pertaining to the vehicle of serenity. This type of mental unification is called “momentary concentration” (kha5ika samādhi). Despite its name, momentary concentration does not signify a single moment of concentration amidst a current of distracted thoughts. Rather, it denotes a dynamic concentration which flows from object to object in the everchanging flux of phenomena, retaining a constant degree of intensity and collectedness sufficient to purify the mind of the hindrances. Momentary concentration arises in the samathayānika yogin simultaneously with his post-jhānic attainment of insight, but for the vipassanāyānika it develops naturally and spontaneously in the course of his insight practice without his having to fix the mind upon a single exclusive object. Thus the follower of the vehicle of insight does not omit concentration altogether from his training, but develops it in a different manner from the practitioner of serenity. Skipping over the jhānas, he goes directly into contemplation on the five aggregates, and by observing them constantly from moment to moment acquires momentary concentration as an accompaniment of his investigations. This momentary

concentration fulfills the same function as the basic jhāna of the serenity-vehicle, providing the foundation of mental clarity needed for insight to emerge.

The importance of momentary concentration in the vehicle of insight is testified to both by the classical Theravāda exegetical literature and by modern exponents of the “dry vipassanā” approach. The Visuddhimagga, in its discussion of mindfulness of breathing, states that “at the actual time of insight momentary unification of the mind arises[^p172-1] through the penetration of the characteristics (of impermanence, and so on).” Its commentary, the Paramatthamañjūsā, defines the phrase “momentary unification of the mind” as concentration lasting only for a moment, stating: “For that too, when it occurs uninterruptedly on its object in a single mode and is not overcome by opposition, fixes[^p172-2] the mind immovably, as if in absorption.”

The same work contains several other references to momentary concentration. Commenting on Buddhaghosa’s remarks that sometimes the path to purification is taught by insight alone, the Mahā)īkā points out that this remark is meant to exclude, not all concentration, but only “that concentration with distinction,” i.e. access and absorption. It then says: “Taking this stanza [Dhp. v. 277] as the teaching for one whose vehicle is insight does not imply that there is no concentration; for no insight comes about without[^p172-3] momentary concentration.” A short while later the Mahā)īkā again identifies momentary concentration with the type of concentration appropriate to one whose vehicle is insight:

… supramundane… concentration and insight are impossible without mundane concentration and insight to precede them; for without the access and absorption concentration in one whose vehicle is serenity, or without the momentary concentration in one whose vehicle is insight, and without the Gateways to Liberation…, the supramundane can never in either case be[^p172-4] reached.

The commentary to the Majjhima Nikāya, in a passage quoted fully above, states that “someone contemplates with insight the five aggregates of clinging as impermanent, etc.[^p172-5] without having produced the aforesaid kinds of serenity.” Its subcommentary, clarifying this statement, explains: “The qualification ‘without having serenity’ is meant to exclude

access concentration, not momentary concentration, for no insight is possible without[^p173-1] momentary concentration.” (Wr. tr.).

A concise description of the way momentary concentration arises is presented by the[^p173-2] Venerable Mahāsī Sayadaw. The Sayadaw explains that a meditator begins the development of insight by attending to the diverse mental and bodily processes that become manifest to him, making the tactile process of the rising and falling of the abdomen his basic object of mindfulness. At first, during the early part of his practice, his mind tends to be distracted by wandering thoughts, but with time his thought-process of noticing becomes well concentrated. When he can notice the objects that appear continuously, undisturbed by hindrances, his practice has arrived at momentary concentration:

While thus practising the exercise of noticing with ‘unhindered mind’, the noticing mind will get more close to and fixed at whichever object is noticed, and the act of noticing will proceed without break. At that time there arises in him, in uninterrupted succession, ‘the concentration of mind lasting for a[^p173-3] moment’, directed to each object noticed.

The Sayadaw holds that this momentary concentration claims the place of purification of mind in the dry insight-worker’s course of development. He states that though it “has only momentary duration, its power of resistance to being overwhelmed by opposition[^p173-4] corresponds to that of access concentration.”

Momentary concentration is thus, in contrast to jhānic concentration, a fluid type of mental collectedness consisting in the uninterrupted continuity of thoughts engaged in noticing the passing succession of objects. Its objects are varied and changing but its force of concentration remains constant. This force fixes the mind on the object as though fixing it in absorption, holding the hindrances at bay and building up the power of mental purification. For this reason momentary concentration can be understood as implicitly included in access concentration in the standard definitions of purification of mind as consisting in access and absorption.

## The Seven Purifications

The path to deliverance, usually expounded in terms of the three trainings in morality, concentration and wisdom, is sometimes divided further into seven stages called the seven purification (sattavisuddhi). The canonical basis for this system is the Rathavinīta Sutta (MN. No.24) and the Pa:isambhidāmagga. The scheme claims special prominence in the Theravāda commentarial tradition since it forms the framework for the Visuddhi-

magga. As such it comes to the forefront in every discussion of the progressive stages of Buddhist meditation.

According to this scheme in order to attain full liberation the meditator has to pass through seven kinds of purification. The seven are: [1] purification of morality (sīla visuddhi); [2] purification of mind (citta visuddhi); [3] purification of view (diṭṭhi visuddhi); [4] purification by the overcoming of doubt (ka/khāvitara5a visuddhi); [5] purification by knowledge and vision of the right and wrong paths (maggāmaggañā5adassana visuddhi); [6] purification by knowledge and vision of the way (pa(ipadāñā5adassana visuddhi); and [7] purification by knowledge and vision (ñā5adassana visuddhi). The Abhidhammattha Saṅgaha recognizes several other sets of terms essential to the development of wisdom – the three characteristics of phenomena, the three contemplations, the ten kinds of insight knowledge, the three liberations, and[^p174-1] the three doors to liberation; but since these all come in the scope of the seven purification we can take the latter as the basis for our discussion, mentioning the others when they become relevant.

1. Purification of Morality (sīlavisuddhi) The purification of morality is identical with the training in the higher moral discipline (adhisīlasikkhā). It consists in the fourfold purification of morality already discussed, i.e. restraint according to the rules of the Pātimokkha, restraint of the senses, purity of[^p174-2] livelihood, and purity in the use of requisites. This is the foundation for the growth of insight just as much as for the development of serenity.

2. Purification of Mind (citta visuddhi) Purification of mind coincides with the training in concentration (samādhi) or higher consciousness (adhicittasikkhā). It is defined as the eight attalnments of absorption together with access concentration. The samathayānika yogin accomplishes purification of mind by achieving access or full absorption in one or several jhānas, thereby suppressing the five hindrances. The vipassanāyānika disciple, as we noted, achieves purification of mind by means of momentary concentration, which as it overcomes the hindrances can be subsumed under access concentration.

3. Purification of view (di99hi visuddhi) The remaining five purifications pertain to the training in wisdom. The first four belong to the mundane portion of the path or insight-wisdom (vipassanā-paññā), the last to the supramundane portion or the wisdom of the noble path (magga-ñā5a).

Purification of view aims at obtaining a correct perspective on the nature of individual existence. Buddhism teaches that it is the wrong grasp of existence, crystallized in the view of a substantial self, that keeps the unenlightened chained to saṃsāra. To reach liberation this delusive view has to be dissolved by purified view, which from the Buddhist standpoint means comprehending the so-called individual as a compound of

evanescent material and mental phenomena without any inner core of substance or selfhood. Purification of view is achieved by bringing these phenomena into focus, defining them in terms of their salient characteristics and functions, and using this knowledge to remove the erroneous view of a self-subsistent ego.

The samathayānika and vipassanāyānika approach this purification from different angles, though the end result is the same for both. The former, after emerging from any fine material or immaterial jhāna except the last (which is too subtle for analysis), discerns its jhāna factors and their concomitants in the light of their specific characteristics, functions, manifestations, and proximate causes. He then defines all these states as “mentality” (nāma). He next discerns the physical basis for these mental[^p175-1] phenomena, the matter of the heart (hadayarūpa), as well as the remaining primary and secondary kinds of material phenomena. These he groups together under the heading of “materiality” (rūpa). He thus perceives the living being as a composite of mentality and materiality, nāmarūpa, without an over-ruling self hidden within or behind it.

The vipassanāyānika begins to purify his view by analyzing the body into the four primary elements – solidity, fluidity, heat, and oscillation. After defining these in terms of their characteristics, he repeats the procedure for the other material phenomena, defining them all as materiality. He then turns to the states of consciousness and their principal concomitants, defining them and grouping them under the heading of “mentality.” Thus, like the first kind of yogin, he eventually arrives at the realization that the living being is merely a compound of mutually supporting mental and physical phenomena apart from which there is no separate entity to be identified as a “self,” “being,” or “person.”

The process of analysis can be undertaken using as basis the five aggregates, the twelve sense bases (the six sense faculties including mind and their six respective objects), the eighteen elements (six objects, six faculties, and six consciousnesses), or any other mode of classification. In the end all are defined in terms of mentality and materiality, resulting in the removal of the view of a self-identical ego.

4. Purification by Overcoming Doubt (kaDkhāvitara3avisuddhi) Once the disciple has overcome the false view of a self by discerning the living being as a compound of material and mental phenomena, he next sets out to overcome doubts concerning this compound by investigating the causes and conditions for mentality-materiality. He understands that the mind-body combination is neither causeless nor created by any single cause but arises due to a multiplicity of causes and conditions. He first seeks out the causes and conditions for the body and discovers that the body is brought into being by four causes operating from the past – ignorance, craving, clinging, and kamma – and sustained in the present by nutriment as its primary present condition. He then turns his attention to mentality, and finds that all mental

phenomena come into being in dependence on conditions, such as sense organs, sense objects, and conascent mental factors, as well as through the defilements and kamma accumulated in the past. When he sees that the present occurrence of mentalitymateriality is due to causes and conditions, he infers that the same principle applied to its occurrence in the past and will apply to its occurrence in the future. In this way he overcomes all doubt and uncertainty regarding the conditioned origination of mind and matter in the three periods of time.

By discerning the conditional basis for the mental-material compound, the yogin arrives at the realization that the course of existence is merely a succession of active kammic processes and passive resultant processes. The aggregates occurring in the past ceased immediately after arising but gave rise to aggregates occurring in the present. The aggregates occurring now will cease in the present and give rise to aggregates occurring in the future. There is nothing permanent passing through this succession. It is merely a sequence of phenomena acting and experiencing without an agent over and above the actions or a subject over and above the experiences.

5. Purification by Knowledge and Vision into the Right and Wrong Paths (maggāmaggañā3adassanavisuddhi) Before the next purification can arise several intermediate steps are necessary. Firstly, after dispelling his doubts by the knowledge of conditionality, the disciple undertakes the form of insight called “comprehension by groups” (kalāpasammasana). Comprehension by groups involves collecting all phenomena into distinct categories and defining them in terms of the three characteristics. Thus the disciple contemplates all material form, feeling, perception, mental formations, and consciousness as impermanent, all as suffering, and all as not self, each being a separate comprehension.

As the Pa:isambhidāmagga states:

Any materiality whatever, whether past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near – he defines all materiality as impermanent: this is one kind of comprehension. He defines it as painful: this is one kind of comprehension. He defines it as not self: this is one kind of comprehension. Any feeling whatever,… Any perception whatever,… Any formations whatever,… Any consciousness whatever,… – he defines all[^p176-1] consciousness as impermanent:… He defines it as not self.

This same method of comprehension can be applied not only to the five aggregates but to any categorical scheme for classifying the constituents of experience – the six sense doors, the six objects, the six kinds of consciousness, six contacts, six feelings, six

perceptions, six volitions, the twelve sense bases, the eighteen elements, etc. The four jhānas, four divine abidings (brahmavihāras), and four immaterial attainments are also included. Since the text advises a beginner to develop comprehension by contemplating those states that are readily discernible by him, a samathayānika yogin will generally choose as his object of comprehension a jhāna he has achieved and mastered; this becomes his sammasitajjhāna, as we explained above.

Whatever objects he selects as material for comprehension, the disciple must understand the precise way they embody the three characteristics. Firstly, they are all impermanent in the sense that they are subject to destruction (khaya((hena). Nothing that comes into being is able to last forever, but whatever arises is bound to eventually pass away. Secondly, they are all suffering in the sense of being fearful (bhaya((hena). Since all composite phenomena are impermanent they cannot provide any lasting contentment or security, but when held to with clinging are a potential source of suffering to be regarded as harmful and fearful. And thirdly, they are all selfless in the sense of being coreless (asāra((hena). Composite phenomena, being compounded by conditions, lack any inner essence that can be conceived as a self, inner agent or subject, and thus are empty of a[^p177-1] core.

When the meditator succeeds in comprehending the various groups in terms of the three characteristics, he acquires comprehension-knowledge, sammasañā5ana. This marks the actual beginning of insight. According to the Abhidhammattha Saṅgaha comprehension knowledge is the first of the ten kinds of insight-knowledge through which a vipassanā[^p177-2] practitioner has to pass.

From comprehension-knowledge the disciple passes on to knowledge of contemplation of rise and fall (udayabbayānupassanāñā5a). This knowledge, defined simply as[^p177-3] “understanding of contemplating present states, change,” is gained by contemplating the presently existent five aggregates as characterized by rise and fall. In brief, it arises by seeing the rise of the aggregates in their characteristic of generation, birth, or arising, and their fall in their characteristic of change, destruction, or dissolution. In greater detail, it involves perceiving the arising of each aggregate through its specific conditions and its cessation through the cessation of these conditions. Focussing in more closely on the present process, the meditator realizes that present phenomena, not having been, are brought into being, and that having been they immediately vanish. Formations appear to him as instantaneous, coming into being and passing away with inconceivable rapidity,[^p177-4] perpetually renewed.

When he gains this initial understanding of rise and fall the meditator has arrived at tender insight (taru5avipassanā). At this point, as a result of his successful practice, ten unprecedented experiences are likely to arise in him. Because they can impede his

progress, these are called the ten imperfections of insight (vipasanūpakkilesā). The ten are: illumination, knowledge, rapture, tranquility, happiness, resolution, exertion,[^p178-1] mindfulness, equanimity, and attachment. If he is not cautious the unwary meditator can misinterpret these occurrences and think that he has reached one of the stages of enlightenment. Therefore novice yogins are advised not to allow themselves to be deterred by such occurrences but to recognize them for what they are: by-products of insight which can become impediments if wrongly adhered to. The skilled meditator contemplates them as bare phenomena – impermanent, suffering, and selfless. He distinguishes the right path from the wrong, realizing that these ten states are not the path but distractions; insight-knowledge free from imperfections is the path. The knowledge that is established in him by making this distinction is the purification by knowledge and vision into the right and wrong paths.

6. Purification by Knowledge and Vision of the Way (pa9ipadāñā3adassana visuddhi) Having relinquished attachment to the ten imperfections of insight and correctly distinguished the true path from the false, the disciple now enters upon a steady progression of insights which will lead him through increasingly deeper levels of understanding right up to the threshold of the supramundane path. These insights, nine in number, begin with mature knowledge of rise and fall and culminate in conformity knowledge (anulomañā5a), the pinnacle of mundane insight. Together with the previously accomplished comprehension-knowledge (sammasanañā5a), these nine insights complete the ten kinds of insight-knowledge mentioned in the Abhidhammattha Saṅgaha.

Knowledge of contemplation of rise and fall (udayabbayānupassanā-ñā5a)

After distinguishing the right path from the wrong the meditator resumes the contemplation of rise and fall. Though he had previously cultivated this knowledge in part, his contemplation was disabled by the imperfections of insight and could not clearly observe the three characteristics. But now that the imperfections have been removed contemplation becomes extremely sharp, causing the three characteristics to stand out in bold relief. By attending to the rise and fall of formations the yogin sees the mark of impermanence – formations changing constantly at every moment, produced and stopped with inconceivable rapidity. As impermanence becomes more conspicuous suffering begins to stand out in its fundamental form, as continuous oppression by rise and fall. The yogin then realizes that whatever changes and causes suffering is insusceptible to the exercise of mastery, hence incapable of being identified as a self or the belongings of a self; this brings the understanding of the mark of selflessness into view. Having uncovered the three characteristics, the meditator sees that the so-called being is nothing but a becoming, a flux of evanescent, painful, impersonal happenings which does not remain the same for two consecutive moments.

Knowledge of contemplation of dissolution (bhangānupassanā-ñā5a)

As the meditator persists in his contemplation of rise and fall, it becomes increasingly apparent that conditioned formations undergo three phases of becoming: a phase of arising (uppāda), a phase of presence ((hiti), and a phase of dissolution (bha/ga). When he can discern these phases clearly, the yogin no longer extends his mindfulness to their arising or presence, but focusses exclusively upon the final phase – their momentary cessation, dissolution, or breaking up. He then sees how formations break up all the time “like fragile pottery being smashed, like fine dust being dispersed, like sesamum seeds[^p179-1] being roasted.” Applying his direct knowledge of present dissolution to the past and future, he draws the inference that all past formations dissolved and all future ones will dissolve. Since dissolution is the culminating point of impermanence, the most salient aspect of suffering, and the strongest negation of selfhood, the three marks stand forth more distinctly than ever before. The whole field of formations thus becomes evident to contemplation as impermanent, suffering, and selfless. With the insight that formations break up constantly without a pause, and that this ceaseless process of momentary dissolution holds sway over the three periods of time, the meditator arrives at knowledge of contemplation of dissolution.

Knowledge of appearance as terror (bhayatūpa((hāna-ñā5a)

As he repeats and cultivates his insight into the destruction, fall, and breakup of formations,

formations classed according to all kinds of becoming, generation, destiny, station, or abode of beings, appear to him in the form of a great terror, as[^p179-2] lions, tigers, leopards,… appear to a timid man who wants to live in peace.

When he sees how past formations have ceased, present ones are ceasing, and future ones will cease, there arises in him knowledge of appearance as terror, born of the understanding that whatever is bound for destruction cannot be relied upon and is therefore fearful.

Knowledge of contemplation of danger (ādīnavānupassanā-ñā5a)

The next stage of insight-knowledge arises naturally out of the previous one. As the meditator cultivates the knowledge of appearance as terror he finds that there is no shelter, protection, or refuge in any kind of becoming. He sees that since there is no shelter in any state of existence there is not a single formation he can pin his hopes on: all hold nothing but danger. Then “the three kinds of becoming appear like charcoal pits full of glowing coals,… and all formations appear as a huge mass of dangers destitute of[^p179-3] satisfaction or substance.” The meditator discerns the potential danger in all existence

just as a timid man sees the danger in a delightful forest thicket infested with wild[^p180-1] beasts.

The Pa:isambhidāmagga explains how the knowledge of appearance as terror (or the knowledge of the presence of fear) becomes the knowledge of danger thus:

Birth is fear – thus understanding in the presence of fear becomes knowledge of danger. Existence is fear… decay is fear… sickness is fear… death is fear… sorrow is fear… lamentation is fear… despair is fear, thus understanding in[^p180-2] the presence of fear is knowledge of danger.

Danger arises out of fearful conditions and fearful conditions give rise to danger. Birth, existence, decay, etc., being fearful states threaten danger to those exposed to them. For a meditator who perceives the dangers in all these fearful conditions, the knowledge of appearance as terror becomes transformed into the knowledge of contemplation of danger.

Knowledge of contemplation of dispassion (nibbidānupassanā-ñā5a)

Seeing the danger in all compounded things the meditator becomes dispassionate towards them. He finds no delight in any state of worldly existence but turns away from them all. Even before he came to this knowledge the meditator had reduced his gross attachments but now, having seen the fear and danger in formations, he gains dispassion towards the five aggregates on account of their impermanent, fearful, and insecure nature. It should be noted that according to the Pa:isambhidāmagga these last three insights – knowledge of terror, of danger, and of dispassion – represent phases of one[^p180-3] kind of insight-knowledge apprehending its object in three different ways.

Knowledge of desire for deliverance (muñcitukamyatā-ñā5a)

When the meditator becomes dispassionate towards the formations in all the kinds of becoming, his mind no longer cleaves to them. The desire then arises in him to get rid of formations, to be released and liberated from them all. The knowledge that arises in association with this desire is knowledge of desire for deliverance.

Knowledge of contemplation of reflection (pa(isa/khānupassanā-ñā5a)

In order to be released from the whole field of conditioned phenomena the meditator returns to the contemplation of formations, examining them again and again in terms of impermanence, suffering and selflessness. Looking at them from a variety of angles in the light of the three characteristics, he sees formations as impermanent because they are non-continuous, temporary, limited by rise and fall, disintegrating, perishable, subject to change, etc.; as suffering because they are continuously oppressed, hard to bear, the basis of pain, a disease, a tumor, a dart, a calamity, an affliction, etc.; as not self because

they are alien, empty, vain, void, ownerless, without an overlord, with none to wield[^p181-1] power over them, etc. This extended understanding of the three characteristics is the knowledge of contemplation of reflection.

Knowledge of equanimity about formations (sa/khārupekkhā-ñā5a)

To deepen his understanding of selflessness the meditator contemplates voidness (suññatā) in various ways. He sees that all compounds are empty of self or of anything belonging to a self, that nothing can be identified as “I” or as the property of an “I”, as[^p181-2] an “other” or as the property of an “other”. Perceiving the voidness of selfhood in formations, the meditator abandons both terror and attachment. He develops instead a sense of detached equanimity:

This [meditator], wanting to get free from all formations, discerns formations by the contemplation of reflection; then, seeing nothing to be taken as ‘I’ or ‘mine’, he abandons both terror and delight and becomes indifferent and[^p181-3] neutral towards all formations.

With the arising of this knowledge the disciple’s mind retreats, retracts, and recoils from all the planes of becoming and no longer goes out to them “just as a fowl’s feather or a[^p181-4] shred of sinew thrown on a fire retreats, retracts, and recoils, and does not spread out.” At this stage, if contemplation should perceive nibbāna, the meditator’s goal, then it will reject formations and focus on nibbāna. But if it does not see nibbāna the meditator will continue in the knowledge of equanimity about formations until his contemplation acquires further maturity.

When the meditator’s knowledge ripens and the move to the supramundane path becomes imminent, insight tends to settle down in one of the three contemplations – on impermanence, suffering, or selflessness – as determined by the meditator’s disposition. Because they lead directly to the liberating experience of the noble path, these contemplations, at the pinnacle of insight, are called the three gateways to liberation (tī5i vimokkhamukhāni). The contemplation of impermanence becomes the gateway to the signless liberation (animitta vimokkha) for it directs the mind to nibbāna as the signless element; the contemplation of suffering becomes the gateway to the desireless liberation (appa5ihitavimokkha) for it directs the mind to nibbāna as the desireless element; and the contemplation of non-self becomes the gateway to the void liberation (suññatavimokkha) for it directs the mind to nibbāna as the void element.

The liberation to which these contemplations are gateways is the supramundane path. Though one in essence the path gains three names according to the aspect of nibbāna it focusses upon. As Buddhaghosa explains:

And here the signless liberation should be understood as the noble path that has occurred by making nibbana its object through the signless aspect. For that path is signless owing to the signless element having arisen, and it is a liberation owing to deliverance from defilements. In the same way the path that has occurred by making nibbana its object through the desireless aspect is desireless. And the path that has occurred by making nibbana its object[^p182-1] through the void aspect is void.

The factor that determines which particular “gateway” will be entered and which liberation attained is the spiritual faculty predominant in the meditator’s mental makeup. One with strong faith (saddhā) tends to settle down in contemplation of impermanence, one with strong concentration (samādhi) in the contemplation of suffering, and one with strong wisdom (paññā) in the contemplation of selflessness; thereby they each attain the path of liberation corresponding to their specific contemplation. As it is said in the Pa:isambhidāmagga:

When one who has great resolution brings [formations] to mind as impermanent, he acquires the signless liberation. When one who has great tranquility brings [them] to mind as painful, he acquires the desireless liberation. When one who has great wisdom brings [them] to mind as not-self,[^p182-2] he acquires the void liberation.

Insight-knowledge that has reached its climax and is about to issue in the supramundane path is also known by another name, “insight leading to emergence” (vu((hānagāminī[^p182-3] vipassanā). This name covers three kinds of knowledge: fully matured equanimity about formations and the two that follow it – conformity knowledge (anuloma ñā5a) and change-of-lineage knowledge (gotrabhū ñā5a). The word “emergence” (vu((hāna) signifies the supramundane path, which is called thus because externally it rises up from formations to apprehend nibbāna and internally it rises up from defilements and the aggregates consequent upon them to a state of complete purity. Since these last three kinds of mundane knowledge lead immediately to the path they are collectively named insight leading to emergence.

Conformity knowledge (anuloma-ñā5a)

As the meditator cultivates equanimity about formations his faculties grow stronger and sharper. Then, at a certain point, the realization dawns that the path is about to arise. A thought-process of equanimity-knowledge occurs comprehending formations through one of the three characteristics – as either impermanent, or suffering, or selfless; the

mind then sinks into the life-continuum (bhava/ga). Following the life continuum there arises in the stream of consciousness a mind-door adverting (manodvārāvajjana) apprehending formations as impermanent, or suffering, or selfless, in accordance with the previous process of equanimity-knowledge. Immediately after the adverting two or three impulsions occur making formations their object in terms of the same characteristic. The three are individually called “preliminary work” (parikamma), “access” (upacāra), and “conformity” (anuloma), but they are most commonly collected under the group name “conformity.” In very quick-witted meditators the moment of preliminary work is passed over and only the two moments of access and conformity occur. Conformity knowledge receives its name because it conforms to the functions of truth in the eight kinds of insight-knowledge preceding it and in the thirty-seven states[^p183-1] partaking of enlightenment to follow. It is the last moment of insight-knowledge before the change over to the supramundane path supervenes.

7. Purification by Knowledge and Vision (ñā3adassanavisuddhi) Change-of lineage (gotrabhū)

The last purification, purification by knowledge and vision, consists of the knowledge of the four supramundane paths – the path of stream-entry, the path of the once-returner, the path of the non-returner, and the path of arahatship. However, immediately after conformity knowledge and before the moment of the first path, there occurs one thought-moment called change-of-lineage knowledge (gotrabhū-ñā5a). This knowledge has the function of adverting to the path. Because it occupies an intermediate position it belongs neither to purification by knowledge and vision of the way nor to purification by knowledge and vision, but is regarded as unassignable. It receives the name “change-of-lineage” because by reaching this stage of knowledge the meditator “passes out of the lineage, the category, the plane, of the ordinary man (puthujjana) and enters[^p183-2] the lineage, the category, the plane, of the Noble Ones.” In bringing about such a radical transformation change-of-lineage is clearly a most important and crucial moment of spiritual development.

The three kinds of conformity knowledge – preliminary work, access, and conformity proper – dispel the “murk of defilements” that conceal the Four Noble Truths. Each of the three clears away a degree of delusion, permitting the truths to become more and more manifest. When the meditator reaches conformity knowledge nothing more needs to be done as preparation for the attainment of the first path. By arousing the insights ending in conformity he has completed whatever he had to do. At this point his mind no longer holds to any formation, but turns away from the entire field of formations as all conditioned phenomena appear to him to be impediments. However, though conformityknowledge dispels the delusion that conceals the truths, it cannot penetrate the truths. For the truths to be penetrated nibbāna must be realized as object. Change-of-lineage

knowledge, which arises right after conformity, is the first state of consciousness to make nibbāna its object. It is the initial advertance to nibbāna, functioning as the proximate, immediate and decisive-support condition for the arising of the first path.

The first path and fruit

Change-of-lineage knowledge perceives nibbāna but cannot destroy the defilements. The eradication of defilements is the work of the four supramundane paths (lokuttaramagga). Each path attainment is a momentary experience apprehending nibbāna, understanding the Four Noble Truths, and cutting off certain defilements. The first path, as Buddhaghosa explains, arises in immediate succession to change-of-lineage:

…After, as it were, giving a sign to the path to come into being it [change-of-lineage] ceases. And without pausing after the sign given by that change-of-lineage knowledge the path follows upon it in uninterrupted continuity, and as it comes into being it pierces and explodes the mass of greed, the mass of hatred, and the mass of delusion, never pierced and[^p184-1] exploded before.

The first path is called the path of stream entry (sotāpattimagga) since the disciple who has reached this path has entered the stream of the Dhamma (dhammasota), the Noble Eightfold Path, which will take him to nibbāna as surely as the waters in a stream will[^p184-2] be carried to the ocean. On entering this path he has passed beyond the level of a worldling (puthujjana) and become a noble one, an ariyan, who has seen and understood the Dhamma for himself. The path gives him real experience of the seven noble[^p184-3] treasures: faith, virtue, conscience, shame, learning, generosity, and wisdom. With the attainment of the path he acquires the eight factors of the Noble Eightfold Path, abandons the eightfold wrong path, and is on the way to becoming a breast-born son of[^p184-4] the Buddha.

As the passage cited above makes clear, when the path-knowledge arises it breaks through the mass of greed, hatred, and delusion, the root-defilements which drive living beings from birth to birth in beginningless saṃsāra. Each supramundane path has the special function of eradicating defilements. The defilements cut off by the successive paths are classified into a set of ten “fetters” (sa.yojana), so called because they keep beings chained to the round of existence. The ten fetters, which all arise out of the three unwholesome roots, are: [1] wrong views of personality (sakkāyadiṭṭhi), [2] doubt (vicikicchā), [3] clinging to rites and rituals (sīlabbata parāmāsa), [4] sensual desire (kāmacchanda), [5] ill will (vyāpāda), [6] lust for fine material existence (rūparāga), [7]

lust for immaterial existence (arūparāga), [8] conceit (māna), [9] restlessness (uddhacca), and [10] ignorance (avijjā). The ten are divided into two groups: the first five are called the fetters pertaining to the lower worlds (orambhāgiyāni samyojanāni) because they keep beings tied to the sensuous realms; the last five are called the fetters pertaining to the higher worlds (uddhambhāgiyāni samyojanāni) because they remain[^p185-1] operative even in the fine material and immaterial realms. Some of these fetters – doubt, sensual desire, ill will, and restlessness – are identical in nature with the five hindrances abandoned by jhāna. But whereas mundane jhāna only suppresses the manifest eruptions of these defilements, leaving the latent tendencies untouched, the supramundane paths cut them off at the root. With attainment of the fourth path the last and subtlest of the fetters are eradicated. Thus the arahat, the fully liberated one, is described as “one who has eliminated the fetters of existence” 2 (parikkhī5abhavasa.yojana).

The path of stream-entry eradicates the first three fetters – the fetters of false views of personality, doubt, and clinging to rites and rituals. The first is the view that the five aggregates can be identified with a self or can be seen as containing, contained in, or[^p185-3] belonging to a self. The more theoretical forms of this view are attenuated by insight-knowledge into impermanence, suffering, and selflessness, but the subtle latent holding to such views can only be destroyed by path-knowledge. “Doubt” is uncertainty with regard to the Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha, and the training; it is eliminated when the[^p185-4] disciple sees for himself the truth of the Dhamma. “Clinging to rites and rituals” is the belief that liberation from suffering can be obtained merely by observing rites and rituals. Having followed the path to its climax, the disciple understands that the Noble Eightfold Path is the one way to the end of suffering, and so can no more fall back on rites and rituals. The path of stream entry not only cuts off these fetters but also eliminates greed for sense pleasures and resentment that would be strong enough to lead to states of loss, i.e. to rebirth in the four lower realms of the hells, tormented spirits,[^p185-5] animals, and titans. For this reason the stream-enterer is released from the possibility of[^p185-6] an unfortunate rebirth.

The path of stream-entry is followed by another occasion of supramundane experience called the fruit of stream entry (sotāpatti-phala). Fruition follows immediately upon the path, succeeding it without a gap. It occurs as the result of the path, sharing its object, nibbāna, and its world-transcending character. But whereas the path performs the active and demanding function of cutting off defilements, the fruit simply enjoys the bliss and peace that result from the path’s completion of its function. Also, whereas the path is limited to only a single moment of consciousness, fruition covers either two or three

moments. In the case of a quick-witted meditator who passes over the moment of preliminary work the cognitive process of the path contains only two moments of conformity knowledge. Thus in his thought-process, immediately after the path has arisen and ceased, three moments of fruition occur. In the case of an ordinary meditator there will be three moments of conformity knowledge and thus, after the path, only two moments of fruition.

The three moments of conformity knowledge and the moment of change-of-lineage are wholesome states of consciousness pertaining to the sense sphere (kāmāvacarakusalacitta). The path consciousness and the fruition that follows it are supramundane states of consciousness (lokuttara citta), the former wholesome (kusala) and the latter resultant (vipāka). The path and fruit necessarily occur at the level of one of the jhānas – from the first to the fourth jhāna in the fourfold scheme, from the first to the fifth in the fivefold scheme. They partake of the character of jhāna because they contain the jhāna-factors endowed with an intensity of absorption corresponding to that of the fine material sphere jhānas. But unlike the mundane jhānas these jhānas of the path and fruit are supramundane, having an altogether different object and function than their counterparts, as we will see in the next chapter.

The following diagram illustrates the thought-process of the path and fruit of stream-entry in the case of a normal meditator with three moments of conformity preceding the path and two moments of fruition succeeding it:

## A B

_______________ _______________________________ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … … bh l ch d p u a g m ph ph bh bh bh bh bh bh

Here line A represents the four thought-moments preceding the path process. This comprises the past bhava/ga or life-continuum (bh), its vibration (l), its cutting off (ch), and the mind’s advertance to formations as impermanent, suffering, or selfless through the mind-door (d). Line B represents the lapsing of the mind back into the passive life-continuum after the fruition phase is over. P represents the moment of preliminary work (parikamma), u the moment of access (upacāra), a the moment of conformity (anuloma), and g the moment of change-of-lineage (gotrabhū) where the ordinary stream of consciousness belonging to the sensual plane changes over to the lineage of the noble path. The following m represents the noble path consciousness (magga citta). After this there are two ph’s representing the fruit of stream-entry, then the mind relapses into the life-continuum (bhava/ga) which is represented by bh repeated six times. The groups of three dots in each citta represent the birth (uppāda), transformation[^p186-1] or duration ((hiti), and dissolution (bha/ga) of each thought moment.

It is evident from this diagram that the noble path consciousness is limited to only a single conscious moment. Immediately after this moment ceases it yields to its fruition moment. The diagram also shows the two distinct thought-moments of path and fruit

linked directly together for the reason that it is impossible to have the thought-moment of the stream-entry path without the fruit following in immediate succession. After two thought-moments of fruition the mental process returns to the life continuum.

After the attainment of fruition the stream-enterer reviews the path, fruition, and nibbāna. He will generally also review the defilements he has destroyed by the path and the defilements remaining to be destroyed by the higher paths; this, however, is not invariably fixed and is sometimes omitted by some meditators. The ariyan disciples who have passed through the next two fruitions will likewise review their attainments in the same way. Thus for each there will be at a minimum three and at a maximum five items[^p187-1] to be reviewed. For the arahat, however, there will be a maximum of four since he has no more defilements to be eliminated. In this way there are a maximum of nineteen[^p187-2] kinds of reviewing (paccavekkha5a) following the supramundane attainments.

The disciple at the moment of the path of stream-entry is called “one standing on the path of stream-entry” or the first noble person; from the moment of fruition up to the attainment of the next path he is called a stream-enterer (sotāpanna), reckoned as the second noble person. Though conventionally the person standing on the path and the one abiding in the fruit can be described as one and the same individual at two different moments, the philosophical perspective requires another kind of descriptive device. From the standpoint of ultimate truth, according to Buddhism, an individual endures as such for only one thought-moment. Therefore, in classifying the types of noble persons, the Buddha drew upon the distinction between the thought-moments of path and fruition as the basis for a distinction between two types of noble persons. This bifurcation applies to each of the four stages of deliverance: for each, the individual at the path-moment is reckoned as one type of noble person, the same individual from the moment of fruition on as another type of noble person.

The texts extoll the stream-enterer as acquiring incalculable benefits as a result of his attainment. He has closed off the doors to rebirth in the woeful states of existence and can declare of himself:

Destroyed for me is rebirth in the hells, in the animal kingdom, in the spirit realm, in the planes of misery, the bad destinations, the downfall. I am a stream-enterer, no longer subject to decline, assured of and destined for full[^p187-3] enlightenment. (Wr. tr.).

He can be certain that he is released from five kinds of fear and hostility: the fear and hostility that come from taking life, from stealing, from sexual misconduct, from false[^p188-1] speech, and from taking intoxicants. He is endowed with the four factors of stream-entry (sotāpattiya/gāni); unwavering confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma,[^p188-2] and the Sangha, and unblemished moral discipline. He has penetrated and seen the[^p188-3] truth with correct understanding. By so penetrating the truth he has limited his future births to a maximum of seven in the happy realms of the human and heaven worlds,[^p188-4] drying up the great ocean of suffering that laid beyond this. Thus the Buddha says that for the stream-enterer who has seen the Dhamma the amount of suffering that remains is like a pinch of dust on the finger nail, while the suffering that has been exhausted is like[^p188-5] the dust on the mighty earth.

The second path and fruit A disciple who has attained to stream-entry is not debarred from progressing to higher stages of deliverance in that same life, but can advance all the way to arahatship if he has sufficient supporting conditions and puts forth the necessary effort. Therefore the yogin abiding at the stage of stream-entry is advised to strive for the next higher path, the path of the once-returner (sakadāgāmimagga), either in the same session or at a later time. He should stir up the spiritual faculties, the powers, and the factors of enlightenment, and with this equipment contemplate the whole range of formations included in the five aggregates in the light of impermanence, suffering, and selflessness. As before he again passes through the progressive series of insights beginning with knowledge of rise and fall and culminating in knowledge of equanimity about formations. If his faculties have not yet reached sufficient maturity his contemplation will remain in equanimity about formations. But if and when his faculties mature, he passes through the moments of conformity-knowledge and change-of-lineage knowledge and attains to the second noble[^p188-6] path, the path of the once-returner.

Unlike the other noble paths, the second path does not eradicate any fetters completely. However, when it arises it attenuates sensual desire and ill will to such a degree that they

no longer occur strongly or frequently but remain only as weak residues. The three unwholesome roots are weakened along with the other fetters derived from them. Following the path-consciousness in immediate succession come two or three moments of the fruit of the once-returner (sakadāgāmi-phala), the inevitable consequence of the path. After fruition reviewing knowledge occurs, as described. The meditator at the moment of the path is known as the third noble person, from the moment of the fruit on as a once-returner (sakadāgāmi), the fourth noble person. He is called a “once-returner” because, if he does not go further in this life, he is bound to make an end of suffering after returning to this world one more time. The standard sutta description reads:

“After the vanishing of the (first) three fetters and the attenuation of greed, hate, and delusion, the monk ‘returns only once more’ to this world. And only[^p189-1] once more returning to this world, he puts an end to suffering.”

The third path and fruit As before, the ardent meditator resumes contemplation on the impermanence, suffering, and selflessness of the aggregates, striving to attain the third stage of deliverance, the stage of a non-returner (anāgāmi). When his faculties mature he passes through the preliminary insights and reaches the third path, the path of the non-returner (anāgāmimagga). This path destroys sensual desire and ill will, the two fetters weakened by the second path. Immediately after the third path its fruition occurs, after which he reviews his position as before. At the moment of the path the yogin is known as one standing on the path of a non-returner, the fifth noble person, from the moment of fruition on as a non-returner, the sixth noble person. He is called a non-returner because he no longer returns to the sensuous realm. If he does not penetrate further he is reborn spontaneously in some higher realm, generally in the pure abodes (suddhāvāsa) of the fine material sphere, and there reaches final nibbāna: “After the vanishing of the five lower fetters, however, the monk appears in a higher world, and there he reaches[^p189-2] nibbāna, ‘no more returning’ from that world.

The fourth path and fruit Again, either in the same session or at some future time, the meditator sharpens his faculties, powers, and enlightenment factors, contemplating the three characteristics of formations. He ascends through the series of insights up to equanimity about formations. When his faculties mature there arise in him conformity and change-of-lineage, followed by the fourth and final path, the path of arahatship (arahattamagga). This path eradicates the remaining five fetters – desire for existence in the fine material realm

(rūparāga), desire for existence in the immaterial realm (arūparāga), conceit (māna), restlessness (uddhacca), and ignorance (avijjā). The fourth path is followed immediately by its fruition, the fruit of arahatship (arahatta-phala), after which reviewing knowledge occurs. The text reads:

But after the vanishing of all biases [ten fetters] he reaches already in this world, the liberation of mind and the liberation through wisdom, after[^p190-1] realizing and understanding it in his own person.

At the moment of the path the yogin is reckoned as one standing on the path of arahatship, the seventh noble person; at the moment of fruition he becomes an arahat, the eighth noble person. At this point he has completed the development of the path and reached the goal of full liberation.

He is one of the Great Ones with cankers destroyed, he bears his last body, he has laid down the burden, reached his goal and destroyed the fetter of becoming, he is rightly liberated with [final] knowledge and worthy of the[^p190-2] highest offerings of the world with its deities.

The eight individuals, from the person standing on the path of stream-entry to the arahat, make up the ariyan Sangha, the community of noble persons forming the third refuge and third jewel of Buddhist veneration. As the Buddha says:

Bhikkhus, there are these eight persons worthy of offerings and hospitality, of gifts and homage, an incomparable field of merit to the world.

The stream-enterer, he who has entered the path to the realization of the fruit of stream-entry, the once-returner, he who has entered the path to the realization of the fruit of once-returner, the non-returner, he who has entered the path to the realization of the fruit of non-returner, the arahat, and he who[^p190-3] has entered the path to arahatship. (Wr. tr.).

[^p161-1]: “Iti sīlaJ iti samādhi iti paññā, sīla-paribhāvito samādhi mahapphalo hoti mahānisaJso, samādhi- paribhāvitā paññā mahapphalā hoti mahānisaJsā, paññāparibhāvitaJ cittaJ sammad eva āsavehi vimuccati, seyyathīdaJ kāmāsavā bhavāsavā di::hāsavā avijjāsavā ti.” DN. 2:123.
[^p162-1]: See above Ch. III, pp. 76-80.
[^p162-2]: Ibid.
[^p162-3]: GS. 3: p. 280. “So saJsa::ho viharati bhikkhūhi bhikkhunīhi upāsakehi upāsikāhi raññā rājamahāmattehi titthiyehi titthitiyasāvakehi, tassa saJsa::hassa vissa::hassa pakatassa bhassaJ anuyuttassa viharato rāgo cittaJ anuddhaJseti, so rāgānuddhaJsena cittena sikkhaJ paccakkhāya hīnāyāvattati.” AN. 3.393.
[^p163-1]: GS. 2:130. “Idha bhikkhave ekacco puggalo vivicceva kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi savitakkaJ savicāraJ vivekajam pītisukhaJ paṭhamajjhānaJ upasampajja viharati. So tad assādeti taJ nikāmeti tena ca vittiJ āpajjati, tattha:hito tad-adhimutto tabbahulavihārī aparihīno kālaJ kurumāno BrahmakàyikānaJ devānaJ sahavyataJ uppajjati. BrahmakāyikānaJ bhikkhave devānaJ kappo āyuppamānaJ, tattha puthujjano yāvatāyukaJ:hatvā yāvatakaJ tesaJ devānaJ āyuppamānaJ taJ sabbaJ khepetvā nirayaJ pi gacchati tiracchānayoniJ pi gacchati pittivisayaJ pi gacchati.” AN. 2:126.
[^p163-2]: GS. 1:245-46. AN. 1:267-68.
[^p163-3]: Psy. Ethics, p. 18. “KatamaJ tasmiJ samaye paññidriyaJ hoti? Yā tasmiJ samaye paññā pajānanā vicayo pavicayo sallakkhaLā upalakkhaLā paccūpalakkhaLā pandiccaJ kosallaJ nepuLLaJ vebhabyā cintā upaparikkhā bhūri medhā parināyikā vipassanā sampajaññaJ patodo pañña paññindriyaJ paññābalaJ paññāsattaJ paññāpasādo paññā āloko paññāobhāso paññāpajjoto paññāratanaJ amoho dhammavicayo sammādi::hi – idaJ tasmiJ samaye paññindriyaJ hoti.” Dhs., pp. 19-20.
[^p164-1]: PP., pp. 479-89. Vism., pp. 369-75.
[^p164-2]: PP., p. 479. “KusalacittasampayuttaJ vipassanāññānaJ paññā.” Vism., p. 369.
[^p164-3]: PP., p. 480. Vism., p. 369.
[^p164-4]: PP., p. 481. “Dhammasabhāvapa:ivedhalakkhaLā paññā.” Vism., p. 370.
[^p164-5]: PP., p. 481. “DhammānaJ sabhāvapa:icchādaka-mohāndhakāra-viddhaJsanarasā; asammohapaccu- pa::hānā; samāhito yathābhūtaJ jānāti passatī ti [AN. 5:3] vacanato pana samādhi tassa pada::hānaJ.” Vism., p. 370.
[^p164-6]: In Pāli: Rūpakkhandha, vedanākkhandha, saññākkhandha, sa/khārakkhandha, viññā5akkhandha.
[^p165-1]: See Vism., Chapter XXIII.
[^p166-1]: Nyanatiloka, The Word of the Buddha, p. 61.
[^p166-2]: PP., pp. 679-80. “TaJ sampādetukāmena samathayānikena tāva,:hapetvā nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaJ avasesarūpārūpavacarajjhānānaJ aññatarato vu::hāya vitakkādīni jhānaKgāni taJsampayuttā ca dhammā lakkhaLarasādivasena pariggahetabbā.” Vism., p. 503. NB: Other commentarial passages allow access concentration (upacārasamādhi) to suffice for the vehicle of serenity. The last āruppa is excluded because its factors are too subtle to be discerned by a beginning meditator.
[^p166-3]: PP., p. 680. Vism., p. 503.
[^p167-1]: Mahāsi Sayadaw (U Sobhana Mahāthera of Burma), The Progress of Insight Through the Stages of Purification, A Modern Pali Treatise on Buddhist Satipaṭṭhāna Meditation, translated by Nyanaponika Thera with notes and the original Pāli text. (Kandy, Ceylon: The Forest Hermitage, 1965; reprint, Kandy, Sri Lanka: Buddhist Publication Society, 1973), p.2 (hereafter cited as PI.).
[^p167-2]: “Ajhānalābhī suddhavipassanāyānikova sukkhavipassako. So hi jhānasinehena vipassanāya asiniddha- bhāvato sukkhā lūkhā vipassanā etassāti sukkhavipassakoti vuccati.” Vism.T. 2:474.
[^p167-3]: “Tatra bhikkhave yāyaJ puggalo lābhī ajjhattaJ cetosamathassa na lābhī adhipaññādhamma- vipassanāya;… lābhī adhipaññādhammavipassanāya na lābhī ajjhattaJ cetosamathassa;… na c’eva lābhī ajjhattaJ cetosamathassa na lābhī adhipaññādhammavipassanāya;… yāyaJ puggalo lābhī c’eva ajjhattaJ cetosamathassa lābhī adhipaññādhammavipassanāya.” AN. 2:92-93.
[^p167-4]: AN.A. 2:325.
[^p168-1]: GS. 2:162. “Idha āvuso bhikkhu samathapubbaKgamaJ vipassanaJ bhāveti, tassa samathapubb- aKgamaJ vipassanaJ bhāvayato maggo sañjāyati. So taJ maggaJ āsevati bhāveti bahulīkaroti. Tassa taJ maggaJ āsevato bhāvayato bahulīkaroto saññojanāni pahīyanti anusayā vyanti honti. Puna ca paraJ āvuso bhikkhu vipassanāpubbaKgamaJ samathaJ bhāveti, tassa vipassanāpubbaKgamaJ samathaJ bhāvayato maggo sañjāyati… vyanti honti.” AN. 2:157.
[^p168-2]: “Idhekacco paṭhamaJ upacārasamādhiJ vā appanāsamādhiJ vā uppādeti. AyaJ samatho. So taJ ca taJ sampayutte ca dhamme aniccādihi vipassati. AyaJ vipassanā. Iti paṭhamaJ samatho pacchā vipass- anā.” MN.A. 1:112.
[^p168-3]: “Idha panekacco vuttappakāraJ samathaJ anuppādetvā’va pañcupādānakkhandhe aniccādihi vipassati. AyaJ vipassanā. Tassa vipassnāpāripūriyā tattha jātānaJ dhammānaJ vossaggārammaLato uppajjati cittassa ekaggatā. AyaJ samatho. Iti paṭhamaJ vipassanā; pacchā samatho.” MN.A. 1:113.
[^p169-1]: MN.T. 1:204.
[^p169-2]: “VipassanāpubbaKgamaJ samathaJ bhāveti ti idaJ pana vipassanāyānikassa vasena vuttaJ.” Sāriputta, [Aṅguttara Nikāya)īkā] Sāratthamañjūsā Nāma Aṅguttara)īkā. [Pāli Text in Burmese script]. 3 vols. (Rangoon, Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1960-61), 2:344 (hereafter cited as AN.T.).
[^p169-3]: See above, Ch. III, pp. 104-108.
[^p169-4]: Ibid., p. 108.
[^p170-1]: PP., pp. 706-709. Vism., pp. 521-22.
[^p170-2]: See below pp. 347-51.
[^p170-3]: “Pa:hamaJ p’āhaJ bhikkhave jhānaJ nissāya āsavānaJ khāyaJ vadāmī ti iti kho pan’etaJ vuttaJ, kin c’etaJ pa:icca vuttaJ? Idha bhikkhave bhikkhu vivicc’eva kāmehi… paṭhamaJ jhānaJ upasampajja viharati… So yad eva tattha hoti rūpagataJ vedanāgataJ saññāgataJ saKkhāragataJ viññāLagataJ, te dhamme aniccato dukkhato rogato gaLYato sallato aghato ābadhato parato palokato suññato anattato samanupassati. So tehi dhammehi cittaJ pa:ivapeti, so tehi dhammehi cittaJ pa:ivapetvā amatāya dhātuyā cittaJ upasaJharati… So tattha:hito āsavānaJ khayaJ pāpuLāti.” AN. 4:422-23.
[^p171-1]: “Sammāsamādhisampannassa upanisā sampannaJ hoti yathābhūtañāLadassanaJ… sammāsamādhi- vipannassa hatūpanisaJ hoti yathābhūtañāLadassanaJ.” AN. 5:4-5.
[^p171-2]: The seven purifications (sattavisuddhi) are discussed in detail in the following section.
[^p172-1]: PP., pp. 311-12. “VipassanākkhaLe lakkhaLapa:ivedhena uppajjati khaLika-cittekaggatā;…” Vism., p. 239.
[^p172-2]: PP., pp. 311-12 Fn. 63. “KhaLikacittekaggatā’ti khaLamatta::hitiko samādhi. So’pi hi ārammaLe niran- taraJ ekākārena pavattamāno pa:ipakkhena anabhibhūto appito viya cittaJ niccalaJ:hapeti.” Vism.T. 1:342.
[^p172-3]: PP., p.2 Fn. 3. “Matta saddena ca visesanivattiatthena savisesaJ samādhiJ nivatteti. So upacārappanā- bhedo vipassanāyānikassa desanāti katvā na samādhi mattaJ. Na hi khaLikasamādhiJ vinā vipassanā sambhavati.” Vism.T. 1:11.
[^p172-4]: PP., p.3 Fn. 4. “Nānantariyabhāvena panettha lokiyāpi gahitāva honti lokiyasamatha vipassanāya vinā tadabhāvato. Samathayānikassahi upacārappanābhedaJ samādhiJ, itarassa khaLikasamādhiJ. Ubhaye- sampi vimokkhamukhattayaJ vinā na kadācipi lokuttarādhigamo sambhavati.” Vism.T. 1:15. For the three gateways to liberation, see below pp. 318-19.
[^p172-5]: See above, p. 294.
[^p173-1]: “SamathaJ anuppādetvāvāti avadhāraLena upacāra samādhiJ nivatteti, na khaLika samādhiJ; na hi khaLikasamādhiJ vinā vipassanā sambhavati.” MN.T. 1:204.
[^p173-2]: PI., pp. 4-5.
[^p173-3]: Ibid. p. 4.
[^p173-4]: Ibid.
[^p174-1]: Nārada. Manual., pp. 408-409, 411-12.
[^p174-2]: See above, Ch. II, pp. 28-36.
[^p175-1]: The ancient Indian physiology, accepted by the Buddhist commentarial tradition, identified the heart with the seat of consciousness. In the canonical texts no such identification is made. Reference is only made to “that matter in dependence on which mind and mind-consciousness occur.” See Narada, Manual., pp. 292-93.
[^p176-1]: PP., 706. “YaJ kiñci rūpaJ atītānāgata paccuppannaJ ajjhattaJ vā bahiddā vā oXārikaJ vā sukhumaJ vā paLītaJ vā yaJ dūre santike vā, sabbaJ rūpaJ aniccato vavattheti ekaJ sammasanaJ, dukkhato vavattheti ekaJ sammasanaJ, anattato vavattheti ekaJ sammsanaJ. Yā kañci vedanā… yā kañci sañña… ye keci saKkhārā… yaJ kiñci viññāLaJ atītānāgatapaccuppannaJ ajjhattaJ vā bahiddhā vā oXārikaJ vā sukhumaJ vā hīnaJ vā paLītaJ vā yaJ dūre santike vā, sabbaJ viññāLaJ aniccato vavattheti ekaJ sammasanaJ, dukkhato vavattheti, ekaJ sammasanaJ, anattato vavattheti, ekaJ sammasanaJ.” Pts., p. 51.
[^p177-1]: PP., pp. 709-710. Vism., p. 523.
[^p177-2]: Narada, Manual., pp. 409, 411.
[^p177-3]: PP., p. 734. Pts., pp. 53-54.
[^p177-4]: PP., pp. 736-38. Vism., pp. 542-43.
[^p178-1]: PP., pp. 739ff. “Obhāsa, ñāLa, pīti, passaddhi, sukha, adhimokkha, paggaha, upa::hāna, upekkhā, nikanti.” Vism., pp. 544-45.
[^p179-1]: PP., p. 752. Vism., p. 553.
[^p179-2]: PP., p. 753. Vism., pp. 554-55.
[^p179-3]: PP., p. 755. Vism., p. 556.
[^p180-1]: Ibid.
[^p180-2]: BMTP., p. 377. “Uppādo bhayanti bhayatūpa::hāne paññā ādīnave ñāLaJ. PavattiJ bhayanti… jarā bhayanti… byādhi bhayanti… maraLaJ bhayanti… soko bhayanti… paridevo bhayanti… upāyāso bhayanti, bhayatūpa::hāne paññā ādīnave ñāLaJ.” Pts., p. 377. SN. 4:173-75.
[^p180-3]: Pts., p. 259.
[^p181-1]: PP., p. 760. Vism., p. 559.
[^p181-2]: PP., pp. 762-63. Vism., p. 561. SN. 3:167.
[^p181-3]: PP., p. 765. Vism., p. 563.
[^p181-4]: PP., p. 766. Vism., p. 564.
[^p182-1]: PP., p. 768. “Ettha ca, animittavimokkho ti animittākārena nibbānaJ ārammaLaJ katvā pavatto ariyamaggo. So hi animittāya dhātuyā uppannattā animitto, kilesehi ca vimuttattā vimokkho. Eten’eva nayena appaLihitākārena nibbānaJ ārammaLaJ katvā pavatto appaLihito, suññatākārena nibbānaJ ārammaLaJ katvā pavatto suññato ti veditabbo.” Vism., p. 565.
[^p182-2]: PP., p. 768. “Aniccato manasikaronto adhimokkhabahulo animittavimokkhaJ pa:ilabhati. Dukkhato manasikaronto passaddhibahulo appaLihitavimokkhaJ pa:ilabhati. Anattato manasikaronto vedabahulo suññatavimokkhaJ pa:ilabhati.” Pts., p. 254.
[^p182-3]: PP., pp. 772-75. Vism., pp. 567-69.
[^p183-1]: PP., pp. 782-83. Vism., pp. 575-76.
[^p183-2]: PP., p. 785. “PuthujjanagottaJ puthujjanasaKkhaJ puthujjanabhūmiJ atikkamamānaJ, ariyagottaJ ariyasaKkhaJ ariyabhūmiJ okkamamānaJ.” Vism., p. 577.
[^p184-1]: PP., pp. 787-88. “…EvaJ nibbattahi ti maggassa saññaJ datvā viya nirujjhati. Maggo pi tena dinnasaññaJ amuñcitvā va avīcisantativasena taJ ñāLaJ anubandhamāno anibbiddhapubbaJ apadālitapubbaJ lobhakkhandhaJ dosakkhandhaJ mohakkhandhaJ nibbijjhamāno vā padālayamāno vā nibbattati.” Vism., p. 579.
[^p184-2]: SN. 5:347.
[^p184-3]: “Saddhā, sīla, hiri, ottappa, suta, cāga, paññā.” DN. 3:251.
[^p184-4]: SN. 2:221.
[^p185-1]: AN. 5:17.
[^p185-2]: MN. 1:4.
[^p185-3]: MN. 1:300.
[^p185-4]: MN. 1:101.
[^p185-5]: Dhs., p. 208.
[^p185-6]: PP., p. 801. Vism., p. 588.
[^p186-1]: Adopted from Nārada, Manual., pp. 214-19. Vism., pp. 111-12. Compendium. pp. 54-55.
[^p187-1]: Nārada, Manual, p. 410. Vism., p. 581.
[^p187-2]: Anuruddha, Abhidharmartha Sa/grahaya, Translated [into Sinhalese] by Sariputra Sangharāja Mahāthera. Revised and edited by the Very Rev. Pannamoli Tissa Thera. 2d ed. (Randombe, Ceylon: W. E. De Silva, Hetumuni Semaneris De Silva and R. C. P. Weerasuriya Waidyaratna, 1916), p. 249. Sumangala, [Vibhāvani)īkā] Anuruddhācariya’s Abhidhammattha Saṅgaha with Abhidhammattha Vibhāvani(īkā, revised and edited by Bhadanta Revatadhammatthera. [Pāli Text in Devanagari script]. (Vārānasi, India: Bauddha Svādhyāya Sātrā, 1965), pp. 157-58 (hereafter cited as Vibhāvani)īkā).
[^p187-3]: “KhīLanirayomhi khīLatiracchānayoniyo khīLapettivisayo khīLāpāyaduggativinipāto; sotāpanno’haJ asmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyano.” SN. 2:68.
[^p188-1]: Ibid. 69.
[^p188-2]: Ibid.70
[^p188-3]: Ibid.
[^p188-4]: Stream-enterers are divided into three kinds: assuming that they will not go further in that same lifetime, one with sluggish faculties will be reborn seven times in the happy destinations; one with medium faculties will be reborn an intermediary number of times; and one with keen faculties will be reborn once more in the human world and there make an end of suffering. (See PP., pp. 833-34. Vism., pp. 61l-12).
[^p188-5]: SN. 2:133-34.
[^p188-6]: The thought-moment immediately preceding the three higher paths only receives the name “change- of-lineage” figuratively, due to its similarity to the moment preceding the path of stream-entry. The yogi actually crossed over to the noble one’s lineage (ariyagotta) earlier, with the moment before the first path. Hence the moment immediately preceding the three higher paths is technically known by another name, vodāna, meaning “cleansing”, so called “because it purifies from certain defilements and because it makes absolute purification (i.e. nibbāna) its object.” (Wr. tr.). “Ekaccasamkilesavisuddhiyā, pana accantavisuddhiyā ārammaLakaraLato ca vodānanti vuccati.” Vism.T. 2:487-88.
[^p189-1]: Nyanatiloka, Comp., trans. and ed., The Buddha’s Path to Deliverance in its Threefold Division and Seven Stages of Purity Being a Systematic Exposition in the Work of the Sutta Piṭaka, (Colombo, Ceylon: The Bauddha Sahitya Sabha, 1952; rev. 3d ed. Colombo, Ceylon: The Bauddha Sahitya Sabha, 1969), p.189 (hereafter cited as Path to Deliverance). “… Bhikkhu tiLLaJ saJyojanānaJ parikkhayā - rāgadosamohānaJ tanuttā sakadāgāmi hoti sakid eva imaJ lokaJ āgantvā dukkhass’antaJ karoti.” AN. 2:238.
[^p189-2]: Path to Deliverance. p. 189. “… Bhikkhu pañcannaJ orambhāgiyānaJ saJyojanānaJ parikkhayā opapātiko hoti tatthaparinibbāyī anāvattidhammo tasmā lokā.” AN. 2:238.
[^p190-1]: Path to Deliverance. p. 189. “… Bhikkhu āsavānaJ khayā anāsavaJ cetovimuttiJ paññāvimuttiJ di::h’eva dhamme sayaJ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati.” AN. 2:238.
[^p190-2]: PP., p. 792. “mahākhīLasavo antimadehadāri ohitabhāro anuppattasadattho parīkkhiLabhavasaJyojano sammaññāvimutto sadevakassa lokassa aggadakkhiLeyyoti.” Vism., p. 582.
[^p190-3]: “A::h’ime bhikkhave puggalā āhuneyyā, pāhuneyyā, dakkhineyyā, añjalikaranīyā anuttaraJ puñña- kkhettaJ lokassa. Sotāpanno sotāpattiphalasacchikiriyāya pa:ipanno, sakadāgāmi sakadāgāmiphalasacchikiriyāya pa:ipanno, anāgāmi anāgāmiphalasacchikiriyāya pa:ipanno, arahā arahattāya pa:ipanno.” AN. 4:292-93.
