## JHÀNA AND THE NOBLE ATTAINMENTS

In the last chapter we followed the progressive unfolding of the path of wisdom culminating in full liberation. This path took us through the supramundane attainments of the four paths and fruits by which the defilements are destroyed and deliverance from suffering is achieved. In the course of our discussion we mentioned that the path and fruits always occur as occasions of jhāna. In the present chapter we will explore more fully these supramundane jhānas, examining them in their own nature, in relation to their mundane counterparts, and in the context of the cognitive processes to which they belong. Then we will consider two special achievements in the meditative field accessible only to particular types of noble persons – the attainment of fruition (phalasamāpatti) and the attainment of cessation (nirodhasamāpatti). This will be followed by an overview of the Theravāda Buddhist typology of noble persons, presented from the standpoint of determining their relation to the mundane accomplishment of jhāna. This overview will enable us to assess, in the last section of this chapter, the place of jhāna in the life of the arahat, the spiritually perfected man in Theravāda Buddhism.

## Supramundane Jhāna

The supramundane paths and fruits, as we saw, always arise as states of jhānic consciousness. They occur as states of jhāna because they contain within themselves the factors of jhāna (jhāna/ga) elevated to a level of intensity corresponding to that of the factors in the mundane jhānas. Since they possess the jhāna-factors endowed with such intensity these states are able to fix upon their object with the force of full absorption. Thence, taking the absorptive force of the jhāna factors as the criterion, the paths and fruits may be reckoned as belonging to either the first, second, third or fourth jhāna of the fourfold scheme, or to the first, second, third, fourth or fifth jhāna of the fivefold scheme.

Though a fully explicit recognition of the supramundane jhānic character of the paths and fruits first comes out in the Abhidhammapi:aka, the basis for this recognition goes back to the suttas. In the section of the Mahāsatipa::hāna Sutta, “the Great Discourse on the Foundations of Mindfulness” (DN. No. 22), where the Buddha defines each factor of the Noble Eightfold Path, right concentration (sammāsamādhi), the eighth factor, is defined by the standard formula for the four jhānas:

And what, bhikkhus, is right concentration? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu, quite secluded from sense pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states of mind, enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied thought and sustained thought with rapture and happiness born of seclusion.

With the subsiding of applied thought and sustained thought he enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which has internal confidence and unification of mind, is without applied thought and sustained thought, and is filled with rapture and happiness born of concentration.

With the fading away of rapture, he dwells in equanimity, mindful and discerning; and he experiences in his own person that happiness of which the noble ones say: ‘Happily lives he who is equanimous and mindful’ – thus he enters and dwells in the third jhāna.

With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, he enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and has purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.

1 This, bhikkhus, is right concentration. (Wr. tr.).

Right concentration, however, can be either mundane or supramundane. That the right concentration here defined as the four jhānas is supramundane becomes clear from the Mahācattārīsaka Sutta (MN. No. 117), a discourse exploring the factors of the Noble Eightfold Path. In this discourse, rather than presenting the path in its own name, the Buddha discusses it under the name of “noble right concentration with its supports and accompaniments.” He begins by asking the monks: “What, monks, is noble right concentration with its supports and accompaniments?” The answer he gives himself:

There are right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness. The one-pointedness of mind accompanied by these seven factors – this is noble right concentration with its[^p192-2] supports and accompaniments. (Wr. tr.).

Each of the path factors in turn is said to have two forms, a mundane form which is “subject to the cankers, pertaining to the side of merit, maturing in the foundations of[^p192-3] existence,” (Wr. tr.), and another form which is “noble, free from cankers,[^p192-4] supramundane, a factor of the path.” (Wr. tr.). The latter is found in “the noble state of consciousness, the cankerless state of consciousness, in one equipped with the noble[^p192-5] path, in one developing the noble path.” (Wr. tr.). Since these factors accompanying right concentration of the noble path are defined as supramundane, it follows that the four jhānas making up right concentration in the Noble Eightfold Path are also supramundane.

In the Abhidhamma system of explanation this connection between the jhānas, paths, and fruits comes to be worked out with great intricacy of detail. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi, in its section on states of consciousness, expounds each of the path and fruition states of consciousness as occasions, first, of one or another of the four jhānas in the tetradic scheme, and then again as occasions of one or another of the five jhānas in the pentadic[^p193-1] scheme. Standard Abhidhammic exposition, as formalized in the synoptical manuals of Abhidhamma, employs the fivefold scheme and brings each of the paths and fruits into connection with each of the five jhānas. In this way the eight types of supramundane consciousness – the path and fruition consciousness of stream-entry, the once-returner, the non-returner, and arahatship – proliferate to forty types of supramundane consciousness, since any path or fruit can occur at the level of any of the five jhānas. This procedure is elaborated in the Abhidhammattha Saṅgaha:

The First Jhāna Sotāpatti Path-consciousness together with initial application, sustained application, joy, happiness, and one-pointedness, The Second Jhāna Sotāpatti Path-consciousness together with sustained application, joy, happiness, and one-pointedness, The Third Jhāna Sotāpatti Path-consciousness together with joy, happiness, and one-pointedness, The Fourth Jhāna Sotāpatti Path-consciousness together with happiness and one-pointedness, The Fifth Jhāna Sotāpatti Path-consciousness together with equanimity and one-pointedness. So are the Sakadāgāmi Path-consciousness, Anāgāmi Path-consciousness, and Arahatta Path-consciousness, making exactly twenty classes of consciousness. Similarly there are twenty classes of Fruit-consciousness. Thus there are forty[^p193-2] types of supramundane consciousness.

The medieval Ceylonese commentator Sāriputta glosses this passage thus: “Stream-entry path-consciousness accompanied by the five-factored first jhāna with initial thought,[^p193-3] etc. is called ‘the first jhāna sotāpatti path-consciousness’.” (Wr. tr.). And so for the rest.

It should be noted that there are no paths and fruits conjoined with the immaterial attainments (āruppas). The reason for this omission is that supramundane jhāna is presented solely from the standpoint of its factorial constitution, and the formless attainments have the same factors as the fifth jhāna – equanimity and one-pointedness. They differ only in regard to the object, a consideration here irrelevant since the paths and fruits all take nibbāna as their object.

The fullest treatment of the supramundane jhānas in the authoritative Pāli literature can be found in the Dhammasaṅgaṇi’s exposition of the supramundane states of consciousness, read in conjunction with the commentary on these passages in the Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi opens its analysis of the first wholesome supramundane consciousness with the words:

On the occasion when one develops supramundane jhāna which is emancipating, leading to the demolition (of existence), for the abandonment of views, for reaching the first plane, secluded from sense pleasures... one enters and[^p194-1] dwells in the first jhāna. (Wr. tr.).

It then goes on to enumerate the various wholesome mental phenomena present on the occasion of that consciousness, defining each of these by their standard synonyms. We will consider the most significant auxiliary constituents of the supramundane jhānas shortly, but first it is instructive to look at the introductory phrase itself in the light of its commentarial elucidation.

The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā explains the word lokuttara, which we have been translating “supramundane,” as meaning “it crosses over the world, it transcends the[^p194-2] world, it stands having surmounted and overcome the world.” (Wr. tr.). It glosses the phrases “one develops jhāna” thus: “One develops, produces, cultivates absorption[^p194-3] jhāna lasting for a single thought-moment.” (Wr. tr.). This gloss shows us two things about the consciousness of the path: first that it occurs as a jhāna at the level of full absorption, and second that this absorption of the path lasts for only a single thought-moment. The word “emancipating” (niyyānika) is explained to mean that this jhāna goes out (niyyāti) from the world, from the round of existence, the phrase “leading[^p194-4] to demolition” (apacayagāmi) that it demolishes and dismantles the process of rebirth.

This last phrase points to a striking difference between mundane and supramundane jhāna. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi’s exposition of the former begins: “On the occasion when one develops the path for rebirth in the fine material sphere... one enters and dwells in[^p194-5] the first jhāna.” (Wr. tr.). Thus, with this statement, mundane jhāna is shown as

sustaining the round of rebirths; it is a wholesome kamma leading to renewed existence. But the supramundane jhāna of the path does not promote the accumulation of the round; to the contrary, it brings about the round’s dismantling and demolition. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā underscores this difference with an illustrative simile:

The wholesome states of the three planes are said to lead to accumulation because they build up and increase death and rebirth in the round. But not this. Just as when one man has built up a wall eighteen feet high another might take a club and go along demolishing it, so this goes along demolishing and dismantling the deaths and rebirths built up by the wholesome kammas of the three planes by bringing about a deficiency in their conditions. Thus it leads to[^p195-1] demolition. (Wr. tr.).

The jhāna is said to be cultivated “for the abandoning of views.” This phrase signifies the function of the first path, which is to eradicate the fetters. The supramundane jhāna of the first path cuts off the fetter of personality view (sakkāyadiṭṭhi) and all speculative views derived from it. The Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā points out that here we should understand that it abandons not only wrong views but other unwholesome states as well, namely doubt, clinging to rites and rituals, and greed, hatred, and delusion strong enough to lead to the plane of misery. The phrase “for reaching the first plane” the[^p195-2] commentary explicates as meaning for attaining the fruit of stream entry.

Immediately after this passage the Dhammasaṅgaṇi lists the constituting phenomena comprised in the supramundane jhāna, followed by their definitions. The elaborate and complex expository method of the canonical Abhidhamma word has been streamlined in the Abhidhammattha Saṅgaha. By avoiding repetitions of the same factor under different headings the manual assigns thirty-eight mental factors (cetasikas) to the first jhāna state of consciousness, whether of any of the four paths and fruits. These are the seven factors common to all states of consciousness, the six general variables, the nineteen universal beautiful factors, wisdom, and three abstinences – right speech, right action, and right livelihood. Two immeasurables – compassion and sympathetic joy – are always[^p195-3] excluded from the paths and fruits.

We saw earlier that the Abhidhammattha Saṅgaha attributes thirty-five possible mental[^p195-4] factors to the first mundane jhāna. This invites a comparison between the composition of the two states. Firstly it will be noticed that compassion and sympathetic joy can be present in mundane jhāna but not in the supramundane. The reason is that those mental

1 factors have sentient beings for object, while the paths and fruits objectify nibbāna. Secondly we should note that the three abstinences are present in the supramundane jhānas but not in the mundane. This is because in mundane consciousness an abstinence (virati) is only present on an occasion when one is deliberately exercising restraint of speech, body, or livelihood. In mundane jhāna no such restraint is being applied; it is only applied in wholesome sense sphere consciousness when one is resisting the impulse towards moral transgression. Even then only one abstinence can occur at a time, and only with respect to one violation covered by the abstinence – for right speech abstaining from lying, slander, harsh speech, or idle chatter; for right action abstaining from killing, stealing, or sexual misconduct; for right livelihood abstaining from one or another form of wrong livelihood. But in the supramundane states the three abstinences occur simultaneously, and they occur with respect to all the violations covered by the abstinence. In the supramundane jhānas of the path they have the function not merely of inhibiting immoral actions, but of destroying the tendencies for these transgressions to occur. For this reason the Dhammasaṅgaṇi describes each abstinence as setughāta, “breaking the bridge,” which the commentary explains as meaning that the abstinence[^p196-2] uproots the condition for misconduct of speech, action or livelihood.

In the Dhammasaṅgaṇi’s enumeration of states, the factor of wisdom enters into the supramundane jhānas as three new faculties spread out over the four paths and fruits. These three are the faculty of “I shall know the unknown” (anaññātaññassāmitindriya), the faculty of final knowledge (aññindriya), and the faculty of the completion of final[^p196-3] knowledge (aññātavindriya). The first is present in the first path, the second in the six intermediate states from the first fruition through the fourth path, and the third in the fourth fruition, the fruit of arahatship. The faculty of “I shall know the unknown” is the wisdom-faculty of one standing on the path of stream-entry, the “unknown” being, according to the commentary, the deathless state of nibbāna or the Four Noble Truths,[^p196-4] neither of which has been known before in beginningless saṃsāra. The faculty of final knowledge is the same faculty of wisdom in those at the intermediate stages of progress, while the faculty of the completion of final knowledge is the fully matured wisdom of the arahat. None of these faculties is present in mundane jhāna.

A good number of constituent factors present in mundane jhāna are repeated again in the analysis of supramundane jhāna, but to these the Dhammasaṅgaṇi adds two qualifying phrases not given in the definitions of their mundane counterparts. These are the phrases “path factor” (magga/ga) and “enlightenment factor” (bojjha/ga). The former attaches to all those states which, under one or another of their different names, enter into the Noble Eightfold Path as right view, right intention, right speech, right

1 action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness and right concentration. Though five of these states – right view, right intention, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration – are present in mundane jhāna, they are not present as path factors (magga/ga) for on those occasions they do not pertain to the noble path leading directly to the cessation of suffering.

The phrase “enlightenment factor” attaches to the states belonging to the seven factors of enlightenment: mindfulness, investigation of phenomena, energy, rapture, tranquility, concentration, and equanimity. This collection of states is called “enlightenment” or “awakening” (bodhi) because, when it arises at the moment of the supramundane paths,[^p197-2] it enables the noble disciple to awaken from the sleep of the defilements. Its components can be present in the mundane jhānas but they are not present there as enlightenment factors. They function as enlightenment factors only in the supramundane jhānas of the noble paths and fruits, for only then do they contribute immediately to the attainment of enlightenment.

Besides these several other differences between mundane and supramundane jhāna may be briefly noted. Firstly, with regard to their objects, the mundane jhānas have a conceptual entity (paññatti) as object; for the kasi5as, impurities, mindfulness of breathing, etc. the object is the counterpart sign (paṭibhāganimitta), for the divine abodes (brahmavihāra) it is sentient beings. In contrast, for the supramundane jhāna of the paths and fruits the object is exclusively nibbāna, a truly existent state (sabhāvadhamma).

With regard to their predominant tone, in mundane jhāna the element of serenity (samatha) prevails. Though the factor of wisdom enters into the mundane jhānas it does not do so with any special prominence. In contrast, the supramundane jhāna of the paths and fruits brings serenity and insight into balance. Wisdom is present as right view (sammādiṭṭhi) and serenity as right concentration (sammāsamādhi). Both function together in perfect harmony. As the Visuddhimagga explains, paraphrasing a passage from the Pa:isambhidāmagga:

At the time of developing the eight mundane attainments the serenity power is in excess, while at the time of developing the contemplations of impermanence, etc., the insight power is in excess. But at the noble path moment[^p197-3] they occur coupled together in the sense that neither one exceeds the other.

This difference in prevailing tone leads into a difference in function or activity between the two kinds of jhāna. Both the mundane and supramundane are jhānas in the sense of closely attending (upanijjhāna) but in the case of mundane jhāna this close attention issues merely in an absorption into the object, an absorption that can only suppress the defilements temporarily. In the supramundane jhāna, particularly of the four paths, the coupling of close attention with wisdom brings the exercise of four functions at a single moment. These four functions each apply to one of the Four Noble Truths, representing the particular way that noble truth is penetrated at the time the paths arise comprehending the truths. The four functions are full understanding (pariññā), abandonment (pahāna), realization (sacchikiriya), and development (bhāvanā). The path penetrates the first noble truth by fully understanding suffering; it penetrates the second noble truth by abandoning craving, the origin of suffering; it penetrates the third noble truth by realizing nibbāna, the cessation of suffering; and it penetrates the fourth noble truth by developing the Noble Eightfold Path, the way to the end of suffering. The Visuddhimagga quotes a passage from the ancients to clear away doubts that one experience can perform four functions simultaneously:

For this is said by the Ancients ‘just as a lamp performs four functions simultaneously in a single moment – it burns the wick, dispels darkness, makes light appear, and uses up the oil – so too, path knowledge penetrates to the four truths simultaneously in a single moment – it penetrates to suffering by penetrating to it with full-understanding, penetrates to origination by penetrating to it with abandoning, penetrates to the path by penetrating to it with developing and penetrates to cessation by penetrating to it with realizing. What is meant? By making cessation its object it reaches, sees and pierces the[^p198-1] four truths.

Filling in the simile, Buddhaghosa explains that as the lamp burns the wick the path knowledge understands suffering; as the lamp dispels darkness the path abandons craving; as the lamp makes light appear the path develops the factors of the Noble Eightfold Path; and as the lamp consumes the oil, the path realizes nibbāna, which[^p198-2] destroys the defilements. Though this fourfold function is peculiar to the pathconsciousness and is not fully shared by fruition, the latter still exercises a decisively cognitive function in that it is said to “closely attend to the real characteristic, the truth[^p198-3] of cessation.” (Wr. tr.).

## The Jhānic Level of the Path and Fruit

When the paths and fruits are assigned to the level of the four or five jhānas, the question arises as to what factor determines their particular level of jhānic intensity. In other words, why do the path and fruit arise for one yogin at the level of the first jhāna, for another at the level of the second jhāna and so forth? The Visuddhimagga and the Dhammasaṅgaṇi Aṭṭhakathā deal with this issue in almost identical ways, discussing it in terms of the question as to what governs the difference in the number of the noble path’s enlightenment factors (bojjha/ga), path factors, (magga/ga) and jhāna factors 1 (jhāna/ga).

Both texts present three theories concerning the determinant of the jhānic level of the path. These theories were apparently formulated by ancient commentators and handed down in succession through their lineages of pupils. The first, ascribed to the Elder Tipiṭaka Cūla Nāga, holds that it is the basic jhāna (pādakajjhāna), i.e. the jhāna used as a basis for the insight leading to emergence in immediate proximity to the path, that governs the difference in the jhānic level of the path. A second theory, ascribed to the Elder Mahā Datta of Moravāpi, says that the difference is governed by the aggregates made the objects of insight (vipassanāya āramma5abhūtā khandhā) on the occasion of insight leading to emergence. A third theory, ascribed to the Elder Tipiṭaka Cūla Abhaya, holds that it is the personal inclination (puggalajjhāsaya) of the meditator that governs the difference.

According to the first theory, the path arisen in a dry insight meditator (sukkhavipassaka) who lacks jhāna, and the path arisen in one who possesses a jhāna attainment but does not use it as a basis for insight, and the path arisen by comprehending formations after emerging from the first jhāna, are all paths of the first jhāna only. They all have eight path factors, seven enlightenment factors, and five jhāna factors. When the path is produced after emerging from the second, third, fourth, and fifth jhānas, and using these as the basis for insight, then the path pertains to the level of the jhāna used as a basis – the second, third, fourth or fifth. The path will have respectively, four, three, two, and again two jhāna factors. However, these paths will possess only seven path factors, since “right intention” (sammāsaṅkappa), as a mode of applied thought (vitakka), has been eliminated in the second and higher jhānas. Those paths associated with the fourth and fifth jhāna will also lack the enlightenment factor of rapture (pītisambojjhanga), and thus have only six enlightenment factors. For a meditator using an immaterial jhāna as basis the path will be a fifth jhāna path.

Thus in this first theory, when formations are comprehended by insight after emerging from a basic jhāna, then it is the jhāna attainment emerged from at the point nearest to the path, i.e. just before insight leading to emergence is reached, that makes the path[^p199-2] similar in nature to itself.

According to the second theory the path that arises is similar in nature to the states which are being comprehended with insight at the time insight leading to emergence occurs. Thus if the meditator, after emerging from a meditative attainment, is comprehending with insight sense sphere phenomena or the constituents of the first[^p200-1] jhāna, then the path produced will occur at the level of that jhāna. On this theory, then, it is the comprehended jhāna (sammasitajjhāna) that determines the jhānic quality of the path. The one qualification that must be added is that a yogin cannot contemplate with insight a jhāna higher than he is capable of attaining.

According to the third theory, the path occurs at the level of whichever jhāna the meditator wishes – either at the level of the jhāna he has used as the basis for insight or at the level of that jhāna he has made the object of insight-comprehension. In other words, the jhānic quality of the path accords with his personal inclination. However, mere wish alone is not sufficient. For the path to occur at the jhānic level wished for, the mundane jhāna must have been either made the basis for insight or used as the object of[^p200-2] insight-comprehension.

3 The difference between the three theories can be understood through a simple example. If a meditator reaches the supramundane path by contemplating with insight the first jhāna after emerging from the fifth jhāna, then according to the first theory his path will belong to the fifth jhāna, while according to the second theory it will belong to the first jhāna. Thus these two theories are incompatible when a difference obtains between basic jhāna and comprehended jhāna. But according to the third theory, the path becomes of whichever jhāna the meditator wishes, either the first or the fifth. Thus this doctrine does not necessarily clash with the other two.

Buddhaghosa himself does not make a decision among these three theories. He only points out that in all three doctrines, beneath their disagreements, there is the recognition that the insight leading to emergence determines the jhānic character of the path. For this insight is the proximate and principal cause for the arising of the path, so whether it be the insight leading to emergence near the basic jhāna or that occurring through the contemplated jhāna or that fixed by the meditator’s wish, it is in all cases this final phase of insight that gives definition to the supramundane path, fixing its path[^p200-4] factors and jhāna factors. Since fruition that occurs immediately after the path has an identical constitution to the path, its own supramundane jhāna is determined by the path. Thus a first jhāna path produces a first jhāna fruit, and so on for the remaining jhānas.

## Two Attainments of the Noble Ones

The Theravāda tradition recognizes two special meditative attainments which are open only to particular types of noble persons (ariyapuggala). These two are the attainment of fruition (phalasamāpatti) and the attainment of cessation (nirodhasamāpatti). The former is a jhāna proper of the supramundane class; the latter, though not a jhāna, still demands complete mastery over the mundane jhānas as a prerequisite for its achievement. We will now consider each of these attainments in turn.

The Attainment of Fruition The fruition consciousness (phalacitta) is a supramundane state of consciousness classed as a resultant (vipāka) because it is produced by the corresponding path consciousness. Like the path consciousness, which it resembles almost exactly in content, fruition is a jhāna operating at the jhānic level of the path. Fruition consciousness occurs in two ways. Its initial occurrence, which we have already discussed, takes place in the cognitive series of the path, when it arises in immediate succession to the path consciousness. On that occasion it persists for two or three thought-moments experiencing the bliss of liberation, and then subsides, followed by the life-continuum. But fruition consciousness can occur in another way too. This second mode of occurrence takes the form of a special meditative attainment accessible to the noble persons of the four stages of deliverance. This meditative attainment is called the attainment of fruition (phalasamāpatti), and comes in four grades corresponding to the four stages of holiness: the fruition attainment of stream-entry, the fruition attainment of the once-returner, the fruition attainment of the non-returner, and the fruition attainment of arahatship.

Like the fruition consciousness occurring in immediate succession to the path, the attainment of fruition is a supramundane jhāna having nibbāna for its object. But whereas fruition in the cognitive series of the path lasts only for two or three thought-moments, the fruition attainment entered subsequently by a noble person can last for as long as the meditator determines; it can continue as a series of fruition consciousnesses following one another in uninterrupted succession for hours or even days on end. Thus fruition attainment provides the ariyans with a special resort to which they can turn in order to experience for themselves the bliss of nibbāna here and now.

The Visuddhimagga discusses fruition attainment under a number of headings. It first defines the attainment of fruition as consisting in the “absorption of the noble fruition in[^p201-1] cessation.” The Mahā)īkā glosses this as meaning that fruition attainment is “the occurrence of the noble fruition-jhāna in the mode of absorption with nibbāna as its[^p201-2] object.” (Wr. tr.). Thus this definition discloses two important facts about the attainment of fruition: that it is a jhāna, and that this jhāna has nibbāna as its object. Though fruition consciousness, on occasions of fruition attainment, is not preceded by a

path – each path being unique and unrepeatable – its jhānic level always continues to correspond to that of the path from which it originally issued. A yogin who attained a first jhāna path will subsequently enter only a first jhāna fruition attainment, one who[^p202-1] had a second jhāna path will always attain a second jhāna fruition, etc.

Fruition attainment, the Visuddhimagga explains, is beyond the range of worldlings (puthujjana), but is available to all noble ones. Each noble person attains that fruition corresponding to his own level of liberation: the stream-enterer attains the fruition of stream-entry, the once-returner the fruition of a once-returner, and so forth. Those who have reached a higher path do not attain a lower fruition while those on a lower level do[^p202-2] not attain a higher fruition. The ariyans resort to this attainment for the purpose of experiencing nibbānic bliss here and now:

For just as a king experiences royal bliss and a deity experiences divine bliss, so too the noble ones think ‘We shall experience the noble supramundane bliss’, and after deciding on the duration, they attain the attainment of fruition[^p202-3] whenever they choose.

Fruition attainment comes about by turning the mind away from all objects other than nibbāna and focussing it exclusively upon nibbāna. To attain fruition the noble disciple should go into solitary retreat, make a prior determination to enter fruition, and then develop insight on formations, going through the series of insights beginning with knowledge of rise and fall. Insight progresses as far as conformity, followed by change-of-lineage knowledge with formations as its object, then “immediately next to it[^p202-4] consciousness becomes absorbed in cessation with the attainment of fruition.” Since the prior determination was made for fruition, not for a higher path, insight only issues in fruition attainment and not in a higher path. The attainment of the latter requires a separate and different guiding aspiration before developing insight.

Fruition attainment is made to last by a prior volition determining the time of the attainment: for it is by determining it thus ‘I shall emerge at such a time’ that it lasts until that time comes. Emergence comes when the mind turns away from nibbāna and takes as its object some sign of formations. Immediately after fruition attainment is emerged from the mind lapses into the life continuum (bhava/ga). Fruition attainment[^p202-5] also occurs momentarily in the process of emerging from the attainment of cessation.

Fruition attainment acquires three names according to the dominant mode of insight in the course of insight-contemplation immediately preceding absorption. If the dominant insight is the contemplation of impermanence, the fruition reached is called the signless liberation (animittavimokkha); if the contemplation of suffering dominates fruition is called the desireless liberation (appa5ihitavimokkha); and if the contemplation of selflessness dominates fruition is called the void liberation (suññatavimokkha). But in a looser sense all three names can be applied to any fruition. For any fruition has as object nibbāna – the signless, desireless, and void element; and again any fruition has a nature which is void of lust, hatred, and delusion, lacking the signs of lust, hatred, and delusion,[^p203-1] and without desires rooted in lust, hatred, and delusion.

The Attainment of Cessation A second attainment in the meditative field restricted to yogins of ariyan stature is the attainment of cessation, nirodhasamāpatti, also called the cessation of perception and[^p203-2] feeling (sannāvedayitanirodha). In this attainment it is not perception and feeling alone that cease, but all mental activity in its entirety. Thus the Visuddhimagga defines the attainment of cessation as “the non-occurrence of consciousness and its concomitants[^p203-3] owing to their progressive cessation.”

This attainment has an even more restricted scope than fruition attainment. It can be obtained only by non-returners (anāgāmis) and arahats who possess the eight attainments, i.e. the four jhānas and the four āruppas. Worldlings, stream-enterers, and once-returners – even those possessing the eight attainments – cannot attain it, nor can it be attained by non-returners and arahats who lack mastery over all eight mundane jhānas. The reason stream-enterers and once-returners cannot attain it is that they lack the necessary qualifications. To attain cessation requires full possession of the two powers of serenity (samatha) and insight (vipassanā). Because those below the level of a non-returner have not fully abandoned sensual desire, their power of serenity is not perfected, and without the perfecting of the power of serenity there is no attainment of[^p203-4] cessation. Cessation can also only be reached in “five constituent becoming,” i.e. in realms where all five aggregates are found. It cannot be reached in the immaterial realms since it must be preceded by the four fine material jhānas, which are lacking in those[^p203-5] realms.

Non-returners and arahats with the required qualifications attain to cessation because, being wearied by the occurrence and dissolution of formations, they think: “Let us dwell in bliss by being without consciousness here and now and reaching the cessation that is[^p203-6] nibbāna.” The Visuddhimagga Mahā)īkā points out that the phrase “cessation that is

nibbāna” means that cessation is similar to the nibbāna element without residue 1 (anupādisesanibbānadhātu). It should not be taken literally as establishing identity between the two.

To enter cessation the qualified meditator must strive to bring about the cessation of consciousness belonging to the base of neither perception nor non-perception. This demands the balanced coupling of serenity and insight. One who utilizes serenity alone can reach the base of neither perception nor non-perception but cannot reach cessation. One who utilizes insight alone can enter fruition attainment but not cessation. The[^p204-2] attainment of cessation requires the alternative application of both serenity and insight.

A meditator wishing to attain cessation enters the first jhāna, emerges from it, and contemplates its formations with insight as impermanent, suffering, and selfless. He repeats the same procedure with each meditative attainment up to the base of nothingness, the next to last immaterial jhāna. After emerging from the base of nothingness he then must perform four preparatory tasks. First he resolves that any requisites he has with him that belong to others will not be damaged by fire, water, wind, thieves, rats, etc. while he is in cessation. This resolution gives effective protection during the duration of his attainment; his own belongings are protected from damage by the power of the attainment itself. Secondly he resolves that if he is needed by the community of bhikkhus he will emerge from his attainment before a bhikkhu comes to call him. Thirdly he resolves that if the Buddha needs to summon him he should emerge before a bhikkhu is sent to call him. And fourthly he determines that his life span will last at least seven days from the moment he attains cessation.

Having performed these four preparatory tasks, the meditator attains the base of neither perception nor non-perception. Then after one or two turns of consciousness have passed the process of consciousness ceases; he becomes without consciousness, attaining to cessation. The stopping of consciousness takes place automatically, as a result of the meditator’s determination to reach cessation. As the nun Dhammadinnā explains:

Friend Visākha, it does not occur to a monk who is attaining the stopping of perception and feeling: ‘I will attain the stopping of perception and feeling,’ or ‘I am attaining the stopping of perception and feeling,’ or ‘I have attained the stopping of perception and feeling.’ For his mind has been previously so[^p204-3] developed in that way that it leads him on to the state of being such.

The meditator will then remain in cessation for as long as he has predetermined. But if he has not done the four preliminary tasks, after reaching the base of neither perception

nor-non-perception he will return to the base of nothingness without attaining[^p205-1] cessation.

Like the attaining of cessation, emergence from cessation comes about automatically, through the exhaustion of the pre-determined time, unless interrupted earlier by the waiting of the bhikkhus, the summons of the Buddha, or the end of the life-span. No verbalization takes place in the course of emergence. As Dhammadinnā says:

Friend Visākha, it does not occur to a monk who is emerging from the attainment of perception and feeling: ‘I will emerge from the attainment of the stopping of perception and feeling,’ or ‘I am emerging...’ or ‘I have emerged from the attainment of the stopping of perception and feeling.’ For his mind has been previously so developed in that way that it leads him on to the state[^p205-2] of being such.

Emergence from the attainment of cessation comes about by means of the fruition of non-returning in the case of a non-returner and the fruition of arahatship in the case of an arahat. As soon as the yogin emerges from cessation, there takes place a series of fruition consciousnesses appropriate to his spiritual level. But for all yogins who emerge from cessation the mind inclines to nibbāna: “When a bhikkhu has emerged from the attainment of the cessation of perception and feeling, friend Visākha, his consciousness[^p205-3] inclines to seclusion, leans to seclusion, tends to seclusion.” Since the mind of one emerging from cessation tends to nibbāna, a non-returner who has come out from cessation can use his attainment as a basis for achieving arahatship. As the Buddha says: “A bhikkhu, completely passing beyond the base of neither perception nor non-perception, enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling. Having[^p205-4] seen with wisdom his cankers are destroyed.” (Wr. tr.).

The attainment of cessation represents the acme of a graduated process of bringing to a stop the formations of body and mind. The bhikkhuni Dhammadinnā explains that there are three types of formations – the bodily formation (kāyasa/khāra), the verbal formation (vacīsa/khāra), and the mental formation (cittasa/khāra). The bodily formation is in-and-out breathing, which is a bodily process connected with the body; the verbal formation is applied and sustained thought (vitakkavicāra), the mental factors directing verbalization; the mental formation is perception and feeling (saññā ca vedanā ca), which are mental processes connected with the mind. For one who is entering the attainment of cessation, Dhammadinnā states, the verbal formation ceases first [in the

second jhāna], the bodily formation ceases next [in the fourth jhāna], and the mental[^p206-1] formation ceases last [with the entrance into cessation]. The Buddha confirms this in a discourse explaining “the gradual cessation of formations” (anupubbasa/khāra[^p206-2] nirodha).

The question might arise as to the difference between a corpse and a meditator in the attainment of cessation. The Venerable Sāriputta explains:

When a bhikkhu is dead, friend, has completed his term, his bodily formations have ceased and are quite still, his verbal formations have ceased and are quite still, his mental formations have ceased and are quite still, his life is exhausted, his heat has subsided, and his faculties are broken up. When a bhikkhu has entered upon the cessation of perception and feeling, his bodily formations have ceased and are quite still, his verbal formations have ceased and are quite still, his mental formations have ceased and are quite still, his life is[^p206-3] unexhausted, his heat has not subsided, his faculties are quite whole.

Another question which might arise concerns the differences between the base of neither perception nor non-perception, the attainment of fruition, and the attainment of cessation. The attainment of cessation differs from the first two in that these two are states of consciousness made up of mind and mental factors (citta-cetasika) while cessation is not a state of consciousness but the stopping of the mental continuum together with its factors. The fourth aruppa is a purely mundane attainment in the sphere of serenity (samatha) accessible to all meditators with the necessary strength of concentration. Its object is purely mundane – the four aggregates of the third aruppa. It does not presuppose any achievements in insight or any attainment of ariyan stature; it is thus held in common by both Buddhist and non-Buddhist meditators. The attainment of fruition, in contrast, is a supramundane state bringing into balance both serenity and insight. Its object is supramundane, nibbāna. Each fruition is open only to those ariyans who have reached the corresponding level of deliverance and it is entered by a preliminary course of practice in insight contemplation on the three characteristics. The attainment of cessation, as distinct from both, is neither mundane nor supramundane, neither conditioned nor unconditioned. As the cessation of consciousness it takes no object. It is open solely to non-returners and arahats having the eight attainments and is reached through an alternating course of serenity and insight. Moreover, to enter the attainment of cessation requires the fulfilment of the four preliminary tasks, while such preparations are not needed for the base of neither perception nor non-perception or for the attainment of fruition.

## The Seven Types of Noble Persons

All noble persons, as we saw, acquire supramundane jhāna along with their attainment of the noble paths and fruits. The noble disciples at each of the four stages of deliverance, moreover, have access to the supramundane jhāna of their respective fruition attainments to which they can resort to experience the peace of nibbāna. However, it remains problematic to what extent they share in the possession of mundane jhāna. To determine an answer to this question it is helpful to consult an early typology of noble disciples described most fully in the Kī:āgiri Sutta (MN. No. 70), reformulated in the Puggalapaññatti of the Abhidhammapi:aka, and clarified further in the commentaries. This typology classifies the eight noble persons of the four paths and fruits into seven types: [1] the faith-devotee, [2] the one liberated by faith, [3] the body-witness, [4] the one liberated in both ways, [5] the truth-devotee, [6] the one[^p207-1] attained to understanding, and [7] the one liberated by wisdom. A look at the explanation of these seven types will enable us to see the range of jhānic attainment reached by the noble disciples, and from there to assess the place of mundane jhāna in the early Buddhist picture of the perfected individual.

The seven types divide into three general classes, each class being defined by the predominance of a particular spiritual faculty. The first two types are governed roughly by predominance of faith, the middle two by predominance of concentration, and the last three by predominance of wisdom. To this division, however, certain qualifications will have to be made as we go along.

[l] The faith devotee (saddhānusāri) is explained in the suttas thus:

Here someone has not yet, in his own person, reached those peaceful uncorporeal deliverances transcending all corporeality; nor have, after wisely understanding all things, the biases [āsava] reached extinction. But he has a certain degree of faith in the Perfect One, a certain degree of devotion to him, and he possesses such faculties as faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration,[^p207-2] and wisdom. Such a one, O monks, is called a Faith-Devotee.

The Puggalapaññatti definition reads:

What person is a faith-devotee? In a person practising for the realization of the fruit of stream-entry the faculty of faith is predominant; he develops the noble path led by faith, with faith as the forerunner. This person is called a faithdevotee. A person practising for the realization of the fruit of stream-entry is a

1 faith-devotee. When established in the fruit he is one liberated by faith. (Wr. tr.).

Whereas the sutta explanation explicitly mentions the lack of the “incorporeal deliverances” (āruppā vimokkhā), i.e. the four immaterial jhānas, the Puggalapaññatti omits this, but states more openly his status as a person on the path of stream-entry. Both concur in recognizing the faith-devotee as a disciple with predominance of faith. When the immaterial jhānas are excluded from the faith devotee’s spiritual equipment, this implies nothing with regard to his achievement of the four lower mundane jhānas. It would seem that the faith-devotee can have previously attained any of the four fine material jhānas before reaching the path, and can also be a dry-insight worker bereft of mundane jhāna. The commentaries add a new element – a connection between the disciple’s subject of insight contemplation and his dominant faculty. Thus for the faith-devotee the subject of insight is impermanence. The Visuddhimagga says:

When a man brings [formations] to mind as impermanent and, having great resolution, acquires the faith faculty, he becomes a faith devotee at the[^p208-2] moment of the stream-entry path.

[2] The one liberated by faith (saddhāvimutta) is strictly and literally defined as a noble disciple at the six intermediate levels, from the fruit of stream-entry through to the path of arahatship, who lacks the immaterial jhānas and has a predominance of the faith faculty. The Buddha explains the one liberated by faith as follows:

But who, O monks, is the one ‘Liberated by Faith’? Here someone has not yet, in his own person, reached those peaceful uncorporeal deliverances transcending all corporeality; and, after wisely understanding all things, have only some biases reached extinction; but his faith in the Perfect One is firmly established, deeply rooted and steadfast. Such a one, O monks, is called[^p208-3] Liberated by Faith.

As in the case of the faith-devotee, the one liberated by faith, while lacking the immaterial jhānas, may still be an obtainer of the four mundane jhānas as well as a dry insight worker.

The Puggalapaññatti states that the person liberated by faith is one who understands the Four Noble Truths, has seen and verified by means of wisdom the dhammas proclaimed by the Tathāgata, and having seen with wisdom has eliminated some of his cankers.

However, he has not done so as easily as the diṭṭhipatta, the person attained to under[^p209-1] standing, whose progress is easier due to his superior wisdom. The fact that the one liberated by faith has destroyed only some of his cankers implies that he has advanced[^p209-2] beyond the first path but not yet reached the final fruit, the fruition of arahatship.

[3] The “body witness” (kāyasakkhi) is a noble disciple at the six intermediate levels, from the fruit of stream-entry to the path of arahatship, who has a predominance of the faculty of concentration and can obtain the immaterial jhānas. The sutta explanation reads:

But who, O monks, is a ‘Body-Witness’? Here someone has, in his own person, reached those peaceful Uncorporeal Deliverances transcending all corporeality. But, after wisely understanding all things, only some biases have[^p209-3] reached extinction. Such a one, O monks, is called a Body-Witness.

The Puggalapaññatti offers a slight variation on this phrasing: “What person is a body-witness? Here some person has, in his own person, reached the eight deliverances,[^p209-4] and having seen with wisdom, some of his cankers are destroyed.” (Wr. tr.). For the sutta’s “immaterial deliverances” (āruppā vimokkhā) the Puggalapaññatti substitutes “the eight deliverances” (aṭṭhavimokkhā). These eight deliverances consist of three meditative attainments pertaining to the fine material sphere (inclusive of all four lower[^p209-5] jhānas), the four immaterial jhānas, and the attainment of cessation. But though the Puggalapaññatti makes this reformulation, it should not be thought either that the achievement of all eight deliverances is necessary to become classified as a body-witness or that the achievement of the three lower deliverances is sufficient. What is both requisite and sufficient to receive the designation “body-witness” is the partial destruction of defilements coupled with the attainment of at least the lowest immaterial jhāna. The Visuddhimagga)īkā states that the body-witness need only obtain one of the immaterial jhānas, and holds that this type becomes fivefold by way of those who obtain any of the four immaterial jhānas and the one who also obtains the attainment of[^p209-6] cessation.

The Visuddhimagga connects the body-witness with suffering as a subject of insight and concentration as a predominant faculty: “When a man brings (formations) to mind as painful and, having great tranquility, acquires the faculty of concentration, he is called a

1 body-witness in all eight instances,” i.e. from the path of stream-entry through arahatship. Its)īkā explains that this extension of the scope of body-witness to persons on the first path and to arahats is figurative in intention and should not be taken as literal. Literally, a body-witness is found only in the intermediate six stages.

One with the eight attainments on the first path would have to be either a faith-devotee or a truth-devotee; the same person at the final fruition would be[^p210-2] one liberated in both ways. (Wr. tr.).

[4] One who is liberated in both ways (ubhatobhāgavimutta) is an arahat who has completely destroyed the defilements and possesses the imaterial attainments. The commentary to the Majjhima Nikāya explains the name “liberated in both ways” as meaning “through the immaterial attainment he is liberated from the material body and[^p210-3] through the path [of arahatship] he is liberated from the mental body.” (Wr. tr.). The sutta defines this type of disciple thus:

Now, who, O monks, is the one Liberated in Both Ways? Here someone has in his own person reached those peaceful Uncorporeal Deliverances transcending all corporeality. And, after wisely understanding all things, the biases have[^p210-4] reached extinction. Such a one, O monks, is called ‘Liberated in Both Ways.’

The Puggalapaññatti gives basically the same formula, but replaces “immaterial[^p210-5] deliverances” with “the eight deliverances.” (Wr. tr.). The same principle of interpretation that applied to the body-witness applies here: the attainment of any immaterial jhāna, even the lowest, is sufficient to qualify a person as both-ways liberated. The Visuddhimagga)īkā says: “One who has attained arahatship after gaining[^p210-6] even one [immaterial jhāna] is liberated in both ways.” (Wr. tr.).

And the Majjhima Nikāya commentary states:

The one liberated in both ways is fivefold by way of those four who attain arahatship by comprehending formations after emerging from one or another

of the four immaterial attainments, and non-returners who attain arahatship[^p211-1] after emerging from [the attainment of] cessation. (Wr. tr.).

[5] The “truth-devotee” (dhammānusāri) is a disciple on the first path in whom the faculty of wisdom is predominant. Here “dhamma” has the meaning of wisdom 2 (paññā). The Buddha explains the truth-devotee as follows:

But who, O monks, is a ‘Truth Devotee’? Here someone has not yet, in his person, reached those peaceful uncorporeal deliverances transcending all corporeality; but, after wisely understanding all things, have the biases reached extinction. But the teachings made known by the Perfect One, find a certain understanding in him, and he is endowed with such faculties as faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration and wisdom. Such a one, O monks, is[^p211-3] called a Truth-Devotee.

The Puggalapaññatti defines the truth-devotee in the same way as the faith devotee, except that it substitutes wisdom for faith as the predominant faculty and as the leader and forerunner in the development of the path. It adds that when a truth devotee is established in the fruit of stream entry he becomes one attained to understanding 4 (diṭṭhippatta). The sutta and Abhidhamma works again differ as to emphasis, the one stressing lack of the immaterial jhānas, the other the ariyan stature. The Visuddhimagga connects the truth-devotee with the contemplation of selflessness: “When a man brings [formations] to mind as not self and having great wisdom, acquires the faculty of[^p211-5] understanding, he becomes a Dhamma-devotee at the moment of the stream entry path. Presumably, though the four immaterial jhānas are denied for the truth-devotee, he may have any of the four fine material jhānas or be a bare insight practitioner without any mundane jhāna.

[6] The one attained to understanding (diṭṭhippatta) is a noble disciple at the six intermediate levels who lacks the immaterial jhānas and has a predominance of the wisdom faculty. The Buddha explains:

But who, O monks, is he who has ‘Attained to Understanding’? Here someone has not yet, in his own person, reached those peaceful uncorporeal deliverances transcending all corporeality; and, after wisely understanding all things, only some biases have reached extinction; but the teaching made known by the

Perfect One, he has fully comprehended and penetrated. Such a one, O monks,[^p212-1] is called one who has ‘Attained to Understanding’.

The Puggalapaññatti defines the one attained to understanding as a person who understands the Four Noble Truths, has seen and verified by means of wisdom the dhammas proclaimed by the Tathāgata, and having seen with wisdom has eliminated[^p212-2] some of his cankers. He is thus the “wisdom counterpart” of the one liberated by faith, but progresses more easily than the latter by virtue of his sharper wisdom.

[7] The one liberated by wisdom (paññāvimutta) is an arahat who does not obtain the immaterial attainments. In the words of the sutta:

But who, O monks, is the one Liberated by Wisdom? Here someone has not yet, in his own person, reached those peaceful Uncorporeal Deliverance transcending all corporeality. But after wisely understanding all things, have the biases reached extinction. Such a one, O monks, is called ‘Liberated by[^p212-3] Wisdom.’

The Puggalapaññatti’s definition merely replaces “immaterial deliverances” with “the[^p212-4] eight deliverances.” Though such arahats do not reach the immaterial jhānas nothing is said to exclude their attainment of the lower jhānas. The commentary to the Majjhima Nikāya states: “The one liberated by wisdom is fivefold by way of the dry insight-worker and those four who attain arahatship after emerging from the four[^p212-5] jhānas.” (Wr. tr.).

It should be noted that the one liberated by wisdom is contrasted not with the one liberated by faith, but with the one liberated in both ways. The issue that divides the two types of arahat is the lack or possession of the four immaterial jhānas and the attainment of cessation. The person liberated by faith is found at the six intermediate levels of sanctity, not at the level of arahatship. When he obtains arahatship, lacking the immaterial jhānas, he becomes one liberated by wisdom even though faith rather than wisdom is his predominant faculty. Similarly a meditator with predominance of concentration but lacking the immaterial attainments also becomes one liberated by wisdom when he attains arahatship. But a yogin who reaches arahatship while possessing the immaterial attainments will still be one “liberated in both ways” even if

wisdom rather than concentration claims first place among his spiritual endowments. as was the case with the Venerable Sāriputta.

## Jhāna and the Arahat

From the standpoint of their spiritual stature the seven types of noble persons can be divided into three categories. The first, which includes the faith-devotee (saddhānusāri) and the truth-devotee (dhammānusāri), consists of those on the path of stream-entry, the first of the eight ariyan persons. The second category, comprising the one liberated by faith (saddhāvimutta), the body-witness (kāyasakkhi), and the one attained to understanding (diṭṭhippatta), consists of those on the six intermediate levels, from the stream-enterer to one on the path of arahatship. The third category, comprising the one liberated in both ways (ubhatobhāgavimutta) and the one liberated by wisdom (paññāvimutta), consists only of arahats.

The ubhatobhāgavimutta, “one liberated in both ways,” and the paññāvimutta, “one liberated by wisdom,” thus represent the terms of a twofold typology of arahats into which every arahat can be fitted. The basis for distinguishing the two is the degree of their accomplishment in jhāna. The ubhatobhāgavimutta arahat experiences in his own person the “peaceful deliverances” of the immaterial sphere, the paññāvimutta arahat lacks this full experience of the immaterial jhānas. Each of these two types, according to the commentaries, again becomes fivefold. The ubhatobhāgavimutta is fivefold by way of those who possess the ascending four immaterial jhānas and the attainment of cessation, the paññāvimutta by way of those who reach arahatship after emerging from the four fine material jhānas and the dry insight meditator whose insight lacks the support of jhāna.

The possibility of arahatship without possession of a mundane jhāna has sometimes been questioned by Theravāda Buddhist scholars, but the weight of the Theravāda tradition appears to lean towards the recognition of such a possibility. We have already mentioned the suddhavipassanāyānika, the yogin with bare insight as his vehicle, also called the sukkhavipassaka, the dry insight meditator. That this kind of meditator does not already possess a jhāna attainment which he just neglects to use as a basis for insight seems implicit from the distinction the Visuddhimagga makes in its discussion of the jhānic level of the path:

... the path arisen in a bare-insight [dry insight] worker, and the path arisen in one who possesses a jhāna attainment but who has not made the jhāna the[^p213-1] basis for insight,... are paths of the first jhāna only.

Here, when the dry-insight worker is distinguished from the jhāna-attainer who does not use his jhāna to develop insight, the clear implication is that the former does not have a basic jhāna. If he did there would be no reason to speak of the two as separate cases.

Further evidence for the existence of arahats lacking mundane jhāna is provided by the[^p214-1] Susīma Sutta together with its commentaries. In this sutta the monk Susīma is perplexed about a group of monks who claim to have reached aññā, the final knowledge of arahatship, yet deny possessing supernormal powers or the peaceful deliverances of the immaterial sphere. To the question how they can be arahats without these attainments they reply: “We are liberated by wisdom” (paññāvimuttā kho maya.). Confused by this answer, Susīma goes to the Buddha for clarification. The Buddha declares: “Susīma, first the knowledge of the structure of phenomena arises, afterwards[^p214-2] the knowledge of nibbāna.” (Wr. tr.). Then he explains the impermanence, suffering, and selflessness of the five aggregates. He shows how contemplation of the three characteristics leads to dispassion, detachment and emancipation, elucidates the law of dependent arising, and convinces Susīma that knowledge of the causal law can issue in liberation without requiring any possession of supernormal powers or the immaterial[^p214-3] attainments.

It is true that in the sutta itself a lack of jhāna is not ascribed to the group of paññāvimutta arahats. The text only mentions the absence of the five abhiññās and the āruppas. But the exegetical sources on the sutta fill in the gap, showing that these arahats reached their goal without mundane jhāna of absorption level. The commentary rephrases the monks’ reply “We are liberated by wisdom” to make explicit the fact that they are dry insight meditators: “‘We are liberated by wisdom, friend’: we are contem[^p214-4] platives, dry insight workers, liberated by wisdom alone.” (Wr. tr.). The commentary explains the knowledge of the structure of phenomena (dhammaṭṭhitiñāṇa) as insight knowledge and the knowledge of nibbāna (nibbāne ñā5a) as path knowledge. It states that the Buddha gave the long disquisition on insight “for the purpose of showing the[^p214-5] arising of knowledge even without concentration.” (Wr. tr.). The subcommentary makes the sutta’s purport still clearer by explaining the commentary’s phrase “even without concentration” as meaning even without concentration previously accomplished, reaching the characteristic of “serenity” (Wr. tr.), adding that “this is said in reference to[^p214-6] the vipassanāyānika.” From all this it follows that these arahats, attaining emancipation by wisdom without prior concentration of the serenity level, lacked mundane jhāna. As arahats, however, they would necessarily have reached the supramundane jhāna of the paths and fruits, with constant access to the jhāna of the attainment of fruition.

In contrast to the paññāvimutta arahats, those arahats who are ubhatobhāgavimutta enjoy a twofold liberation. Through their mastery over the formless attainments they are liberated from the material body (rūpakāya), capable of dwelling in this very life in the meditations corresponding to the immaterial planes of existence; through their attainment of arahatship they are liberated from the mental body (nāmakāya), presently free[^p215-1] from all defilements and sure of final emancipation from future becoming. Paññāvimutta arahats only possess the second of these two liberations.

The double liberation of the ubhatobhāgavimutta arahat should not be confused with another double liberation frequently mentioned in the suttas in connection with arahatship. This second pair of liberations, called cetovimutti paññāvimutti, “liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom,” is shared in common by all arahats. It appears in the stock passage descriptive of arahatship: “With the destruction of the cankers he here and now enters and dwells in the cankerless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom,[^p215-2] realizing it for himself with direct knowledge.” That this twofold liberation belongs to paññāvimutta arahats as well as to those who are ubhatobhāgavimutta is made clear by the Putta Sutta, where the stock passage is used for two types of arahats called the “white lotus recluse” and the “red lotus recluse”:

How, monks, is a person a white lotus recluse? Here, monks, with the destruction of the cankers a monk here and now enters and dwells in the cankerless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, having realized it for himself with direct knowledge. Yet he does not dwell experiencing the eight deliverances with his body. Thus, monks, a person is a white lotus recluse.

And how, monks, is a person a red lotus recluse? Here, monks, with the destruction of the cankers a monk here and now enters and dwells in the cankerless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, having realized it for himself with direct knowledge. And he dwells experiencing the eight[^p215-3] deliverances with his body. Thus, monks, a person is a red lotus recluse. (Wr. tr.).

Since the description of these two types coincides with that of paññāvimutta and ubhatobhāgavimutta the two pairs may be identified, the white lotus recluse with the paññāvimutta, the red lotus recluse with the ubhatobhāgavimutta. Yet the paññāvimutta arahat, while lacking the experience of the eight deliverances, still has both cetovimutti and paññāvimutti.

Other suttas help fill in the meaning of cetovimutti and paññāvimutti. The latter term is almost invariably used in reference to arahatship, signifying the arahat’s permanent deliverance from ignorance through his full penetration of the Four Noble Truths. The term cetovimutti has a more varied application. In some places it signifies the temporary release of the mind from defilements given by attainments in serenity meditation, as when the Mahāvedalla Sutta speaks of the fourth jhāna, the four Brahmavihāras, and the[^p216-1] base of nothingness as forms of cetovimutti. But elsewhere cetovimutti is held up as the final goal of the Buddhist meditative discipline. In this context it is usually qualified by the adjective “unshakeable” (akuppā). Thus the Mahāvedalla Sutta calls “unshakeable[^p216-2] liberation of mind” the chief of all liberations of mind. After attaining enlightenment[^p216-3] the Buddha declares: “Unshakeable is the liberation of my mind.” And elsewhere he says: “This is the goal of the holy life, monks, this is its essence, this is its consummation[^p216-4] – the unshakeable liberation of the mind.” (Wr. tr.).

When cetovimutti and paññāvimutti are joined together and described as “cankerless” (anāsava), they can be taken to indicate two aspects of the arahat’s deliverance. Cetovimutti signifies the release of his mind from craving and its associated defilements, paññāvimutti the release from ignorance: “With the fading away of lust there is[^p216-5] liberation of mind, with the fading away of ignorance there is liberation by wisdom.” (Wr. tr.). “As he sees and understands thus his mind is liberated from the canker of[^p216-6] sensual desire, from the canker of existence, from the canker of ignorance” (Wr. tr.) – here release from the first two cankers can be understood as cetovimutti, release from the canker of ignorance as paññāvimutti. In the commentaries cetovimutti is identified with the concentration factor in the fruit of arahatship, paññāvimutti with the wisdom factor:

By the word ‘mind’ the concentration concomitant with the fruit of arahatship is meant, by the word ‘wisdom’ the concomitant wisdom is meant. The concentration there is called ‘liberation of mind’ because it has liberated the mind from lust, the wisdom is called ‘liberation by wisdom’ because it has[^p216-7] liberated the mind from ignorance. (Wr. tr.).

Since every arahat reaches arahatship through the Noble Eightfold Path, he must have attained supramundane jhāna in the form of right concentration, the eighth factor of the path, defined as the four jhānas. This jhāna remains with him as the concentration of the fruition attainment of arahatship, which occurs at the level of supramundane jhāna

corresponding to that of his path. Thus he always stands in possession of at least the supramundane jhāna of fruition, called the anāsava. cetovimutti, “cankerless liberation of mind.” However this consideration does not reflect back on his mundane attainments, requiring that every arahat possesses mundane jhāna.

Nevertheless, though early Buddhism tends to acknowledge the possibility of a dryvisioned arahatship, the attitude prevails that jhānas are still desirable attributes in an arahat. They are of value not only prior to final attainment, as a foundation for insight, but retain their value even afterwards as well. The value of jhāna in the stage of arahatship, when all spiritual training has been completed, is twofold. One concerns the arahat’s inner experience, the other his outer significance as a representative of the Buddha’s dispensation.

On the side of inner experience the jhānas are valued as providing the arahat with a[^p217-1] “blissful dwelling here and now” (diṭṭhadhammasukhavihāra). The suttas often show arahats attaining to jhāna and the Buddha himself declares the four jhānas to be[^p217-2] figuratively a kind of nibbāna in this present life. With respect to levels and factors there is no difference between the mundane jhānas of an arahat and those of a non-arahat. The difference concerns their function. For non-arahats the mundane jhānas constitute wholesome kamma; they are deeds with a potential to produce results, to precipitate rebirth in a corresponding realm of existence. But in the case of an arahat mundane jhāna is no more kamma. Since he has eradicated ignorance and craving, the roots of kamma, his actions leave no residue; they have no capacity to generate results. For him the jhānic consciousness is, in Abhidhamma terms, a kiriya consciousness, a mere functional occurrence which comes and goes and once gone disappears without a[^p217-3] trace.

The value of the jhānas extends beyond the confines of the arahat’s personal experience and testifies to the spiritual efficacy of the Buddha’s dispensation itself. From the evidence of the texts the early Buddhists regarded the jhānas as ornamentations of the yogin, testimonies to the accomplishment of the spiritually perfect man and the effectiveness of the teaching he follows. A stock passage used to commend a worthy monk reads: “He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas pertaining to the[^p217-4] higher consciousness, blissful dwellings here and now.” (Wr. tr.). The Buddha calls this ability to gain the jhānas at will a quality that makes a monk an elder. When accompanied by several other spiritual accomplishments the same ability is said to be an essential quality of “a recluse who graces recluses” (sama5esu sama5asukhumālo) and[^p217-5] of a monk who can move unobstructed in the four directions. Having ready access to the four jhānas makes an elder dear and agreeable, respected and esteemed by his fellow

1 monks. Facility in gaining the jhānas is one of the eight qualities of a completely inspiring monk (samantapāsādika bhikkhu) perfect in all respects; it is also one of the[^p218-2] eleven foundations of faith (saddhāpadānāni). It is significant that in all these lists of qualities the last item is always the attainment of arahatship, “the cankerless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom,” showing that all desirable qualities in a bhikkhu culminate in arahatship.

On one occasion, when a number of chief disciples met together in a lovely Salwood at Gosinga on a beautiful moonlit night, the discussion arose among them as to what type of monk could illumine that Salwood. The Venerable Revata answered that it would be a monk who delights in solitary meditation, who is delighted by solitary meditation, who is intent on mental tranquility. The Venerable Sāriputta replied that it would be a monk who could abide in whatever meditative attainment he wanted in the morning, midday,[^p218-3] and evening. Sāriputta himself is extolled for his ability to enter the four jhānas, the four āruppas, and the attainment of cessation without giving rise to the thoughts “I am attaining,” “I have attained” or “I have emerged.” The reason he can avoid such thoughts is that, as an arahat, he has uprooted all “I”-making, “mine”-making, and tendencies to[^p218-4] conceit. Elsewhere the Buddha praises Sāriputta for his skill in entering each of the nine attainments, analyzing them into their constituent formations, and contemplating[^p218-5] them with a mind unconfined by attraction or repulsion.

The higher the degree of his mastery over the meditative attainments, the higher the esteem in which an arahat monk is held and the more praiseworthy his accomplishment is considered to be. On one occasion the Buddha met with three arahat bhikkhus – the Venerable Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila – and elicited from them the admission that they were all capable of attaining the four jhānas, the four āruppas, cessation, and the fruit of arahatship. After this discussion the Buddha declared that if all the people in the world were to recollect these three young men with a mind of confidence, it would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time to come. He concludes with the words: “See how these three young men are faring for the welfare of the many folk, out[^p218-6] of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare, and happiness of gods and men.” (Wr. tr.).

Though the paññā-vimutta and ubhatobhāgavimutta arahats are equal with respect to release from suffering, special regard extends to the latter, and the greater his facility in meditation the higher the regard. Thus the Buddha says:

When a monk has mastered these eight deliverances in direct order, in reverse order, and in both orders, when he can attain to and emerge from any one of them, whenever he chooses, wherever he chooses and for as long as he chooses – when too, with the destruction of the cankers, he enters and abides in the cankerless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, after realizing it for himself here and now through direct knowledge – then such a monk is called one liberated in both ways. There is no other liberation in both ways higher[^p219-1] and more excellent than this liberation in both ways. (Wr. tr.).

The highest respect goes to those monks who possess not only liberation in both ways but the six abhiññās, the first five the outcome of the eight attainments of serenity, the sixth, the supramundane abhiññā of arahatship, the outcome of insight. The Buddha declares that a monk endowed with the six abhiññās is worthy of gifts and hospitality,[^p219-2] worthy of offerings and reverential salutations, a supreme field of merit for the world. In the period after the Buddha’s parinibbāna, the Venerable Ānanda was asked whether the Buddha had designated a successor, to which he replied in the negative. He also denied that the Sangha had selected a single monk to be its leader. However, he said, there were monks in the Order who were regarded with special reverence and esteem, and to whom other monks looked for guidance and support. What qualified a monk to give guidance to others was endowment with ten qualities: moral virtue, learning, contentment, mastery over the four jhānas, the five mundane abhiññās, and attainment[^p219-3] of the cankerless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom. Perhaps it was because he was extolled by the Buddha for his facility in the meditative attainments and the abhiññās that the Venerable Mahākassapa assumed the presidency of the first great[^p219-4] Buddhist council held in Rājagaha after the Buddha’s passing away.

In the Amba::ha Sutta the Buddha recites a verse praising the man endowed with knowledge and conduct (vijjācara5asampanna): “The kshatriya is the best among men for those who look to lineage, but one endowed with knowledge and conduct is best[^p219-5] among gods and men.” (Wr. tr.). Conduct (cara5a), he explains, includes moral discipline, sense restraint, mindfulness and discernment, contentment, solitary living, the abandonment of the five hindrances, and finally, as the outcome of these practices, the attainment of the four jhānas. Knowledge (vijjā) consists in insight-knowledge, the knowledge of the mind-made body, the five mundane abhiññās, and the knowledge of

the destruction of the cankers. The Buddha concludes his exposition by saying of a bhikkhu who has fulfilled this training:

This bhikkhu is called ‘endowed with knowledge’, ‘endowed with conduct’, ‘endowed with knowledge and conduct’. There is no other endowment with knowledge and conduct higher or more excellent than this endowment with[^p220-1] knowledge and conduct. (Wr. tr.).

[^p192-1]: DN. 2:313.
[^p192-2]: “Katamo ca, bhikkhave, ariyo sammāsamādhi sa-upaniso saparikkhāro? SeyyathīdaJ: sammādi::hi sammāsaJkappo sammāvācā sammākamanto sammā-ājīvo sammāvāyāmo sammāsati. Yā kho, bhikkhave, imehi sattaKgehi cittassa ekaggatā parikkhātā; ayaJ vuccati, bhikkhave, ariyo sammā samādhi sa-upaniso iti pi, saparikkhāro iti pi.” MN. 3:71.
[^p192-3]: “Sāsavā puññabhāgiyā upadhivepakkā.” MN. 3:72.
[^p192-4]: “Ariyā anāsavā lokuttara maggaKgā.” Ibid.
[^p192-5]: “Ariya cittassa anāsavacittassa ariyamaggasamaKgino ariyamaggaJ bhāvayato.” Ibid.
[^p193-1]: Dhs., pp. 74-86.
[^p193-2]: Nārada, Manual., pp. 63-64. “Vitakka-vicāra-pīti-sukh’ekaggatā-sahitaJ Pa:hamajjhāna-Sotāpattima- ggacittaJ, Vicāra-pīti-sukh’ekaggatā-sahitaJ Dutiyajjhāna-SotāpattimaggacittaJ, Pīti-sukh’ekaggatā-sahitaJ Tatiyajjhāna SotāpattimaggacittaJ, Sukh’ekaggatā-sahitaJ Catutthajjhāna SotāpattimaggacittaJ. Upekkh’ekaggatā-sahitaJ Pañcamajjhāna SotāpattimaggacittaJ c’ati. …Tathā Sakadāgāmimagga, Anāgāmimagga, Arahattamaggacittañ c’āti, samavīsati maggacittāni. Tathā phalacittāni c’ati samacattāXīsa lokuttaracittāni bhavantī’ti.” Ibid, pp. 62-63.
[^p193-3]: Pa:hamajjhānena vitakkādipañcaKgikajjhānena sampayuttaJ sotāpattimaggacittaJ paṭhamajjhāna- sotāpattimaggacittaJ.” AS., p. 37. Vibhāvanī)īkā, pp. 36f. Dhs.A., pp. 272-73.
[^p194-1]: “YasmiJ samaye lokuttaraJ jhānaJ bhāveti niyyānikaJ apacayagāmiJ di::higatānaJ pahānāya pa:hamāya bhūmiyā pattiyā vivicceva kāmehi… paṭhamaJ jhānaJ upasampajja viharati.” Dhs., p. 72.
[^p194-2]: “LokaJ taratīti lokuttaraJ, lokaJ uttaratīti lokuttaraJ, lokaJ samatikkamma abhibhuyya ti::hatīti lokuttaraJ.” Dhs.A., p. 259.
[^p194-3]: “Jhānam bhāvetīti ekacittakkhaLikaJ appanājhānaJ bhāveti janeti vaYYheti.” Ibid.
[^p194-4]: Ibid.
[^p194-5]: “YasmiJ samaye rūpūpapattiyā maggaJ bhāveti vivicceva kāmehi… paṭhamaJ jhānaJ upasampajja viharati.” Dhs., p. 44.
[^p195-1]: “Yathā ca pana tebhūmakakusalaJ vattasmiJ cutipa:isandhiyo ācināti vaYYhetīti ācayagāmi nāma hoti. Na tathā idaJ. IdaJ pana yathā ekasmiJ purise a::hārasahatthā pākārā cinante aparo mahamuggaraJ gahetvā tena citacita::hānaJ apacinanto vidhaJsento eva gaccheyya. Evameva tebhūmakakusalena cita cutipa:isandhiyo paccayavekallākārena apacinantaJ vidhaJsentaJ gacchatīti apacayagāmi.” Dhs.A., p. 259.
[^p195-2]: Dhs.A., pp. 259-60.
[^p195-3]: Nārada, Manual., pp. 127-29. NB: The higher jhānas have respectively thirty-seven, thirty-six, and thirty-five components as applied thought, sustained thought, and rapture are abandoned at these levels.
[^p195-4]: See above, Chapter IV, pp. 149-50.
[^p196-1]: The other two immeasurables – loving kindness and equanimity – are particular modes of the mental factors “non-hatred” and “specific neutrality.” Since their parent factors do not necessarily have sentient beings for object they can be present even with other objects and are, in fact, universal concomitants of wholesome states of consciousness.
[^p196-2]: Dhs.A., p. 264.
[^p196-3]: Dhs., pp. 77, 91, 138.
[^p196-4]: Dhs.A., p. 261.
[^p197-1]: It should be noted that in the paths and fruits occurring at the level of the second through fifth jhānas, only seven path factors are present. This is because right intention (sammāsaṅkappa) is a form of vitakka, which is made to subside with the attainment of the second jhāna. Similarly, in the paths and fruits of the fourth and fifth jhānic levels only six enlightenment factors are present, rapture having been abandoned with the attainment of the fourth jhāna of the fivefold system.
[^p197-2]: See Dhs.A., p. 262.
[^p197-3]: PP., p. 798. “Lokiyānañ ca a::hannaJ samāpattīnaJ bhāvanākāle samathabalaJ adhikaJ hoti; aniccānupassanādīnaJ bhāvanākāle vipassanābalaJ. AriyamaggakhaLe pana yuganaddhā te dhammā pavattanti aññamaññaJ anativattana::hena.” Vism., p. 586.
[^p198-1]: PP., p. 808. “VuttaJ h’etaJ porāLehi: ‘Yathā padīpo apubbaJ acarimaJ ekakkhaLena cattāri kiccāni karoti, va::iJ jhāpeti, andhakāraJ vidhamati, ālokaJ pavidaJseti, sinehaJ pariyādiyati, evaJ eva maggañāLaJ apubbaJ acarimaJ ekakkhaLena cattāri saccāni abhisameti, dukkhaJ pariññābhisamayena abhisameti, samudayaJ pahānābhisamayena abhisameti, maggaJ bhāvanābhisamayena abhisameti, nirodhaJ sacchikiriyābhisamayena abhisameti. KiJ vuttaJ hoti? NirodhaJ ārammaLaJ karitvā cattāri pi saccāni pāpuLāti passati pa:ivijjhatī ti.’ ” Vism., p. 593.
[^p198-2]: PP., p. 809. Vism., p. 593.
[^p198-3]: “PhalaJ pana nirodhasaccaJ tathalakkhaLaJ upanijjhāyati.” Dhs.A., p. 211.
[^p199-1]: PP., pp. 778-80. Vism., pp. 572-73. Dhs.A., pp. 271-74. Expositor, 2:307-308.
[^p199-2]: PP., p. 779. Vism., p. 573. Dhs.A., p. 272. Expositor, 2:307-308.
[^p200-1]: PP., p. 779. Vism., p. 573. Dhs.A., pp. 272-73. Expositor, 2:308.
[^p200-2]: PP., p. 780. Vism., p. 574. Dhs.A., p. 273.
[^p200-3]: Dhs.A., p. 274. Expositor, 2:3l0.
[^p200-4]: PP., pp. 778-79. Vism. p. 573.
[^p201-1]: PP., p. 820. “Yā ariyaphalassa nirodhe appanā.” Vism., p. 602.
[^p201-2]: “Ariyassa phalajhānassa nibbāne ārammaLabhūte appanākārena pavatti.” Vism.T. 2:515.
[^p202-1]: PP., p. 822. Vism., p. 603.
[^p202-2]: PP., p. 820. Vism., p. 602.
[^p202-3]: PP., p. 821. “Yathā hi rājā rajjasukhaJ devatā dibbasukhaJ anubhavanti, evaJ ariyā, ariyaJ lokuttarasukhaJ anubhavissāmā ti addhānaparicchedaJ katvā icchiticehitakkhaLe phalasamāpattiJ samāpajjanti.” Vism., p. 602.
[^p202-4]: PP., p. 822. Vism., p. 603. N.B.: Whereas change-of-lineage preceding the path has nibbāna for its object, change-of-lineage preceding fruition attainment objectifies formations. The reason is given in the Visuddimagga Mahā)īkā: “Why does change-of-lineage not have nibbana as its object here as it does when it precedes the path? Because states belonging to fruition are not associated with an outlet [as in the case of the path]. For this is said ‘What states are an outlet? The four unincluded paths’.” Vism.T. 2:518.
[^p202-5]: PP., pp. 822-23. Vism., p. 603.
[^p203-1]: Nārada, Manual., pp. 422-23. MN. 1:298.
[^p203-2]: MN. 1:175, 296, 301-302.
[^p203-3]: PP., p. 824. “Yā anupubbanirodhavasena cittacetasikānaJ dhammānaJ appavatti.” Vism., p. 604.
[^p203-4]: PP., p. 827. Vism., p. 607.
[^p203-5]: PP., p. 828. Vism., p. 607.
[^p203-6]: PP., p. 828. Vism., p. 607.
[^p204-1]: Vism.T. 2:902.
[^p204-2]: PP., p. 828. Vism., p. 607.
[^p204-3]: MLS. 1:364. “Na kho āvuso Visākha saññāvedayitanirodhaJ samāpajjantassa bhikkhuno evaJ hoti: ahaJ saññāvedayitanirodhaJ samāpajjissaJ ti vā, ahaJ saññāvedayitanirodhaJ samāpajjāmīti vā, ahaJ saññāvedayitanirodhaJ samāpanno ti vā, atha khvāssa pubbe va tathā cittaJ bhāvitaJ hoti yaJ taJ tatha- ttāya upanetīti.” MN. 1:302.
[^p205-1]: PP., pp. 831-32. Vism., p. 610.
[^p205-2]: MLS. 1:364. “Na kho, āvuso Visākha, saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vu::hahantassa bhikkhuno evaJ hoti: ahaJ saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vu::hahissanti vā, ahaJ saññāvedayitanirodhasamā- pattiyā vu::hahāmīti vā, ahaJ saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vu::hito ti vā, atha khvāssapubbe va tathā cittaJ bhāvitaJ hoti yaJ taJ tathattāya upanetīti.” MN. 1:302.
[^p205-3]: PP., p. 832. “Saññāvedayitanirodhasamāpattiyā vu::hitassa kho āvuso Visākha bhikkhuno vivekaninnaJ cittaJ hoti vivekapoLaJ vivekapabbhāranti.” MN. 1:302.
[^p205-4]: “Sabbaso nevasaññānāsaññāyatanaJ samatikkamma saññāvedayitanirodhaJ upasampajja viharati, paññāya c’assa disvā āsavā parikkhīLā honti.” MN. 1:175.
[^p206-1]: MN. 1:302.
[^p206-2]: SN. 4:217.
[^p206-3]: PP., pp. 832-33. “YvāyaJ, āvuso, mato, kālakato, tassa kāyasaLkhārā niruddhā pa:ippassaddhā, vacī saKkhārā… cittasaKkhārā niruddhā pa:ippassaddhā, āyu parikkhiLo, usmā vūpasantā, indriyāni paribhinnāni. YvāyaJ bhikkhu saññāvedayitanirodhaJ samāpanno, tassapi kāyasaKkhārā niruddhā, pa:ippassaddhā, vacīsaKkhārā… citta saKkhārā niruddhā, pa:ippassaddhā, āyu aparikkhīLo, usmā avupasantā, indriyāni aparibhinnāni ti.” MN. 1:296.
[^p207-1]: In Pāli: [1] saddhānusāri, [2] saddhāvimutta, [3] kāyasakkhi, [4] ubhatobhāgavimutta, [5] dhammā- nusāri, [6] diṭṭhippatta, and [7] paññāvimutta.
[^p207-2]: Path to Deliverance, pp. 183-84. “Idha bhikkhave ekacco puggalo ye te santā vimokhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā te na kāyena phassitvā viharati, paññāya c’assa disvā āsavā aparikkhīLā honti, Tathāgate c’assa saddhāmattaJ hoti pemamattaJ, api c’assa ime dhammā honti seyyathīdaJ saddhindriyaJ viriyindriyaJ satindriyaJ samādhindriyaJ paññindriyaJ. AyaJ vuccati bhikkhave puggalo saddhānusāri.” MN. 1:479.
[^p208-1]: “Katamo ca puggalo saddhānusāri? Yassa puggalassa sotāpattiphalasacchikiriyāya pa:ipannassa saddhindriyaJ adhimattaJ hoti. Saddhāvāhi saddhāpubbaKgamaJ ariyamaggaJ bhāveti. AyaJ vuccati puggalo saddhānusāri. Sotāpattiphalasacchikiriyāya pa:ipanno puggalo saddhānusāri. Phale:hito saddhāvimuttoti.” Dhātukathā Puggalapaññattipā8i, [Pāli Text in Burmese script]. (Rangoon. Burma: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1961), p.182 (hereafter cited as Pug.P.).
[^p208-2]: PP., p. 770. Vism., p. 566.
[^p208-3]: Path to Deliverance, p. 183. “Katamo ca bhikkhave puggalo saddhāvimutto? Idha bhikkhave ekacco puggalo ye te santā vimokhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā te na kāyena phassitvā viharati, paññāya c’assa disvā ekacce āsavā parikkhīLā honti, Tathāgate c’assa saddhā nivi::hā hoti mūlajātā pati::hitā. AyaJ vuccati bhikkhave puggalo saddhāvimutto.” MT. 1:478.
[^p209-1]: Pug.P., pp. 184-85.
[^p209-2]: The Visuddhimagga, however, says that arahats in whom faith is predominant can also be called “liberated by faith.” (PP., p. 770. Vism. p. 566). Its)īkā points out that this remark is only intended figuratively, not literally, in the sense that for those arahats arahatship results from being saddhāvimutta at the moment of the fourth path. Literally such arahats would be paññāvimutta. Vism.T. 2:468.
[^p209-3]: Path to Deliverance, p. 182. “Katamo ca bhikkhave puggalo kāyasakkhi: Idha bhikkhave ekacco puggalo ye te santā vimokhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā te kāyena phassitvā viharati, paññāya c’assa disvā ekacce āsavā parikkhīLā honti. AyaJ vuccati bhikkhave puggalo kāyasakkhi.” MN. 1:478.
[^p209-4]: Pug.P., p. 184.
[^p209-5]: DN. 3:159. MN. 2:12. Also see BMTP., pp. 484-86.
[^p209-6]: Vism.T. 2:466.
[^p210-1]: PP., p. 770. “Yo pana [sankhāre] dukkhato manasikaronto passaddhibahulo samādhindriyaJ pa:ilabhati, so sabbattha kāyasakkhi nāma hoti.” Vism., p. 566.
[^p210-2]: “A::havimokkhalābhī pana paṭhamamaggakkhaLe saddhānusāri vā dhammānusāri vā siyā, majjhe chasu:hānesu kāyasakkhi, pariyosāne ubhatobhāgavimutto.” Vism.T. 2:466. The position that one with the eight attainments on the first path can be a faith-devotee or a truth-devotee conflicts with the explanation of these types in the Kī:āgiri Sutta. However the sevenfold typology of this sutta makes no provision for a disciple of the first path who gains the immaterial jhānas.
[^p210-3]: “Arūpasamāpattiyā rūpakāyato vimutto. Maggena nāmakāyato.” MN. 2:131.
[^p210-4]: Path to Deliverance, p. 182. “Katamo ca bhikkhave puggalo ubhatobhāgavimutto? Idha bhikkhave ekacco puggalo ye te santā vimokhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā te kāyena phassitvā viharati, paññāya c’assa disvā āsavā parikkhīLā honti. AyaJ vuccati bhikkhave puggalo ubhatobhāgavimutto.” MN. 1:477.
[^p210-5]: Pug.P., p. 184.
[^p210-6]: “Tattha pana ekampi [arūpajjhānaJ] laddhā arahattaJ patto ubhatobhāgavimutto eva hoti.” Vism.T. 2:466.
[^p211-1]: "So catunnaJ arūpasamāpattīnaJ ekekato vu::hāya saJkhāre sammasitvā arahattaJ pattānaJ catunnaJ, nirodhā vu::hāya arahattaJ pattā anāgāmino ca vasena pañcavidhā honti.” MN.A. 3:131.
[^p211-2]: PP., pp. 771. Vism., p. 566.
[^p211-3]: Path to Deliverance, p. 183. “Katamo ca bhikkhave puggalo dhammānusāri? Idha bhikkhave ekacco puggalo ye te santā vimokhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā te na kāyena phassitvā viharati, paññāya c’assa disvā āsavā aparikkhīLā honti, Tathāgatappaveditā c’assa dhammā paññāya mattaso nijjhānaJ khamanti, api c’assa ime dhammā honti seyyathīdaJ saddhindriyaJ viriyindriyaJ satindriyaJ samādhindriyaJ paññindriyaJ. AyaJ vuccati bhikkhave puggalo dhammānusārī.” MN. 1:479.
[^p211-4]: Pug.P., p. 185.
[^p211-5]: PP., p. 770. “Yo pana anattato manasikaronto vedabahulo paññindriyaJ pa:ilabhati, so sotāpatti- maggakkaLe dhammānusāri hoti.” Vism., p. 566.
[^p212-1]: Path to Deliverance, p. 183. “Katamo ca bhikkhave puggalo di::hippatto? Idha bhikkhave ekacco puggalo ye te santā vimokhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā te na kāyena phassitvā viharati, paññāya c’assa disvā ekacce āsavā parikkhīLā honti, Tathāgatappaveditā c’assa dhammā paññāya vodi::hā honti vocaritā. AyaJ vuccati bhikkhave puggalo di::hippatto.” MN. 1:478.
[^p212-2]: Pug.P., p. 185.
[^p212-3]: Path to Deliverance, p. 182. “Katamo ca bhikkhave puggalo paññāvimutto? Idha bhikkhave ekacco puggalo ye te santā vimokhā atikkamma rūpe āruppā te na kāyena phassitvā viharati, paññāya c’assa disvā āsavā parikkīLā honti. AyaJ vuccati bhikkhave puggalo paññāvimutto.” MN. 1:477-78.
[^p212-4]: Pug.P., p. 185.
[^p212-5]: “So sukkhavipassako, catūhi jhānehi vu::hāya arahattaJ pattā cattāro cāti imesaJ vasena pañcavidhova hoti.” MN.A. 3:131.
[^p213-1]: PP., p. 779. “…sukkhavipassakassa uppannamaggo pi samāpattilābhino jhānaJ pādakaJ akatvā uppannamaggo pi… paṭhamajjhānikā va honti.” Vism., p. 573.
[^p214-1]: SN. 2:119-23.
[^p214-2]: “Pubbe kho Susīma dhamma::hitiñāLaJ pacchā nibbāne ñāLaJ.” SN. 2:124.
[^p214-3]: Ibid. 2:124-27.
[^p214-4]: “Avuso mayaJ nijjhānakā sukkhavipassaka paññāmatten’eva vimuttā ti dasseti.” SN.A. 2:117. N.B. The word nijjhānaka is ambiguous: the word nijjhāna is used in the suttas to mean reflection or contemplation and we here follow that usage by rendering its derivative as “contemplative”; but the purport might also be “lacking jhāna,” as the prefix nir sometimes has a privative as well as augmentative meaning.
[^p214-5]: “Vinā pi samādhiJ evaJ ñāLuppattidassanatthaJ.” Ibid.
[^p214-6]: “Samatha lakkhaLappattaJ purimasiddhaJ vinā pi samādhinti vipassanā yānikaJ sandhāya vuttaJ.” SN.T. 2:125.
[^p215-1]: Vism.T. 2:468.
[^p215-2]: See Chapter VII, p. 335.
[^p215-3]: “Kathañca bhikkhave puggalo samaLapuLYarīko hoti? Idha bhikkhave bhikkhu āsavānaJ khayā anāsavaJ cetovimuttiJ paññāvimuttiJ di::h’eva dhamme sayaJ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati, no ca kho a::havimokhe kāyena phassitvā viharati. EvaJ kho bhikkhave puggalo samaLa- puLYarīko hoti. Kathañca bhikkhave puggalo samaLapadumo hoti? Idha bhikkhave bhikkhu āsavānaJ khayā anāsavaJ cetovimuttiJ paññāvimuttiJ di::h’eva dhamme sayaJ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati, a::ha ca vimokhe kāyena phassitvā viharati. EvaJ kho bhikkhave puggalo samaLapadumo hoti.” AN. 2:87.
[^p216-1]: MN. l:296-98.
[^p216-2]: Ibid. 1:298.
[^p216-3]: “Akuppā me cetovimutti.” SN. 5:423.
[^p216-4]: “Yā ca kho ayaJ bhikkhave akuppā cetovimutti etad atthaJ idaJ bhikkhave brahmacariyaJ etad sāraJ etaJ pariyosānaJ.” MN. 1:l97.
[^p216-5]: “… Rāgavirāgā cetovimutti avijjāvirāgā paññāvimutti.” AN. l:61.
[^p216-6]: MN. 1:183-84.
[^p216-7]: “Ettha cetovacanena arahattaphala sampayutto va samādhi, paññāvacanena taJsampayuttā paññā vuttā. Tattha ca samādhi rāgato vimuttattā cetovimutti, paññā avijjāya vimuttattā paññā vimuttīti veditabbo.” MN.A. l:169.
[^p217-1]: See MN. 1:33.
[^p217-2]: See AN. 4:453-54.
[^p217-3]: Nārada, Manual., pp. 43-45.
[^p217-4]: “CatunnaJ jhānānaJ abhicetasikānaJ di::hadhammasukhavihārānaJ nikāmalābhī hoti akicchalābhī akasiralābhī…” AN. 2:23.
[^p217-5]: AN. 3:l31, 135.
[^p218-1]: Ibid. 114.
[^p218-2]: AN. 4:314-15. AN. 5:337.
[^p218-3]: MN. 1:213-15.
[^p218-4]: SN. 3:235-38.
[^p218-5]: MN. Sutta No. lll.
[^p218-6]: “Passa… ete tayo kulaputtā bahujanahitāya pa:ipannā bahujanasukhāya lokānukampāya, atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānanti.” MN. 1:21l.
[^p219-1]: “Yato kho Ānanda bhikkhu ime a::ha vimokhe anulomaJ pi samāpajjati, pa:ilomaJ pi samāpajjati, anuloma-pa:ilomaJ pi samāpajjati, yath’icchakaJ yad icchikaJ yāvad icchakaJ samāpajjati pi vu::hāti pi, āsavānaJ ca khayā anāsavaJ cetovimuttiJ paññā-vimuttiJ di::he va dhamme sayaJ abhiññā sacchikatvā upasampajja viharati, ayaJ vuccati Ānanda bhikkhu ubhatobhāga-vimutto, imāya ca Ānanda ubhato-bhāgavimuttiyā aññā ubhato-bhāga-vimutti uttaritarā vā paLītatarā vā n’atthī ti.” DN. 2:71.
[^p219-2]: AN. 3:280-81.
[^p219-3]: MN. 3:11-12.
[^p219-4]: SN. 3:209-214.
[^p219-5]: “Khattiyo se::ho janetasmiJ ye gotta pa:isārino/VijjācaraLa-sampanno so se::ho deva-mānuse.” DN. 1:99.
[^p220-1]: “AyaJ vuccati Amba::ha bhikkhu vijjā-sampanno iti pi caraLasampanno iti pi vijjā-caraLa-sampanno iti pi. Imāya ca Amba::ha vijjā-caraLa-sampadāya aññā vijjāsampadā caraLa-sampadā uttaritarā vā paLītatarā vā n’atthi.” DN. 1:100.
